# Breakthrough_Advertising


FOREWORD

Welcome to the most sought after
direct marketing masterpiece. This book was recently selling for
over $900 dollars used--so I decided to re-issue it. It is a real
privilege to bring Gene Schwartz's advertising wisdom back into
print. We built a wonderful business based on his wisdom.

He was a special delight and a treat to know--Gene was
6'2" and reminded me of Gary Cooper in The Fountainhead. But
Gene had much more charm and wit and a fabulous, unforget
table smile.

Exciting sight--watching the multi-talented genius's fingers
flying over the keyboard creating another brilliant ad. And then
he'd sit back with that great smile, read it over and enjoy it more
and more.

Gene wrote advertising copy lor the best direct marketers
in America. And then he published a book in 1964 titled Hoxc
to Double Your Child's Grades in School, following up with How
to Double Your Power to Learn and then Breakthrough Adver
tising in 1966.

He was very clever--he exchanged his copywriting for ac
cess to mailing list names and promoted his own books to them!
But then Gene had a stroke in 1978 and he had trouble
typing . .. for it affected his right side. But he worked and

iii


IV

worked until he became quite proficient typing with
left hand.

F O R E W O RD

just his

My big idea--Retain Gene as a business consultant instead
of a copywriter to guarantee him a regular income. He became
very important to us in that new role. l ie helped very much in
the creation of the Bottom Line/Personal concept and of our ed
itorial style. Awesome.

Then there was Gene III, the scientist, always reading the
leading-edge science books and belonging to a very sophisticated
group that met weekly to discuss the implications of those sci
entific advances on society.

Finally, there was Gene IV--an amazing talent as an art col
lector, together with his wife Barbara, a famous interior designer.
They built a fabulous art collection betting on Hans Hoffman
Morris Lewis, Frank Stella, Donald Judd and Milton Averv well
before anyone else had heard of them. Their first acquisition was
by the color-pioneer Hans Hoffman. It took me years to appre
ciate Hoffman's work. Barbara also helped me build an incredi
ble collection of photographs that are now at the Art Institute of
them--I discovered a
Chicago. On my first gallery tour with
crumpled photo by the Starn twins that had two words on i tConfusion/Order. That is what I'm devoted t o - b r i n g i ng order
from confusion. So Barbara and I built a very exciting Lessons
in Life collection. I was her first art advisory client. And it is
with her generous permission that we bring Gene's classic book
back into the world.

Founder and President. Boardroom

Publisher of Bottom

Martin Edelston
Inc.
Line/Personal

January 2004


PREFACE TO THE
BOARDROOM EDITION

This book was

first published
in 1966--what seems to be three lifetimes ago. It was put out
bv Prentice-Hall, a marvelous house: it sold onlv a few thousand
copies. But since it was published I have had people coming to me
regularly to tell me that thev directlv credit reading this book with
their making millions of dollars.

This is amazing enough, but even more remarkable is the fact
that--when I look back on it--not a single one of these people
was a copywriter. Here is a book that is called Breakthrough Ad
vertising . . . and yet was used bv men who were not in the business
of advertising at all, to make more monev than most of us ever
dream of accumulating.

How did this happen? Whv was a publisher, a financier, a
manufacturer of novelties, able to make so very much monev with
a book that is about putting sentences together? (The financier
told me that, within one vear after obtaining the book, he had
raised his net worth from $100.000 to $10 million). Are the
sentences contained in the pages that follow actually that power
ful? Can they change the fortunes of men so radically? Are thev
far more universally adaptable than I had first t h o u g h t . .. so they
are no longer about advertising products, but literally about open
ing whole new markets for them?


\1

PREFACE

Therefore, eighteen years later, when Boardroom Books asked
me to republish this text. I had to study it again, with the fresh
eyes of a person who had not read it in all that time, to see what
was the real content of my book, and its real effect on its readers.
I did. I discovered the secret. And I am using this introduc
tion now to admit my red-faced shame. What I had thought I had
written those mam- years ago was a book on advertising; what I
actually put down on these pages was an entireh' different book,
on a far broader theme:

There is a way to develop an entirely new market for a new
or an old product. That way involves a certain number of clearludefined steps. And in
this hook 1 show „ou every single one of
J
those steps.

'

As you mav know, all of us--no matter what official designa
tion we give the industry we do business m - a re actually on a
deeper level, in exactly the same profession. We are all'simply
creating or exploiting markets for our products. When
the market
is born, our business is simultaneously given birth. When it grows
so does our share of it. When it is mature, our sales charts develop
heir first aches and pains. And at that point, if we can develop a
fresh new- market for that old product,
it is exactly as if we
achieved the Faustian dream, and enabled that product to drink
from the proverbial "Fountain of Youth."

We are all primarily conceptual midwives. helping g ive birth to
new markets for our products. All the other functions" we or our
business, p e r f o r m - t he manufacturing, distribution
service
hnancmg, and all the r e s t - a re simply adjuncts to this vital central
process.

We are, in a single phrase, "Market-Makers." We sense each
new market in its turn. We test and evaluate its size and scope We
gauge its true potential financial strength, and then we focus all
the people, all the money and all the desire that makes it up on
one ultimate object: our own product.

Most of the time, the market exists before our product, and
we simply tap its present strength. But, m this era of constant


PREFACE

Ml

change, we ourselves mav help give it its first viable financial
form. We may sense that people want computers in their homes
as well as their offices . .. or want to walk around all dav with
music plugged into their ears . . . or would like to spend three
air-conditioned hours in a faraway galaxv, battling with light-swords
against evil and tyranny.

Making a market, then, is not. as I thought when I originally
wrote this book, simply a matter of making an ad. It is also the
making of a product. And it is the making of a conduit through
which that product can be obtained bv the people whom you have
made desire it more than an equivalent sum of their money. This
book outwardly talks about the sentences that make up the pri
mary appeal of that product to that market. But its true and
deeper message is found when it is interpreted as a market-diviner,
and a market-intensifier. In other words, its message will show vou
how to find your "dream" market, and how to drive it into a na
tional "feeding frenzy."

And I have also made an equally important discovery upon
reviewing this book since it was first published. The examples in its
pages have grown slightly older, but the principles that these ex
amples manifest are timeless. For example, if I were writing this
book
its examples would show more appreciation of
feminism, environmental awareness, health and fitness striving--
even the blessed sexual revolution. Thev would be more open and
more frank than thev could have been then.

today,

All this is for the good--but this book is not about revieiving
todm/s ads, but creating from scratch tomorrow's winners! This
book is about avoiding the need for copying or imitating am other
product or advertisement. So today's examples are as "outdated"
as those of two decades ago. This book is about what-happensnext, and the fundamental rules of making a fortune out of slight
ly redirecting that tomorrow.

You see, people don't change: only the direction of their de
sires do. They cannot be made to want anything, nor is it neces
sary to create want. All that is necessary is to be able to channel


v U1

PREFACE

those wants into the proper products that offer legitimate satis
faction for them. It takes ten million . . . fifteen million . . . twentvfive million. . . fifty-- million . . . one hundred and fifty million people
. .. to create a vast market for your goods. But it takes only one
slip of paper--or its recitation by a series of salesmen--to direct all
those millions of people to your stores, or vour catalogues, or your
wholesalers.

Not one single thing has changed in that regard since I wrote

this book. Nor will it ever alter in the slightest.

So this book is not about building better mousetraps. It is,
however, about building larger mice, and then building terrify
ing fear of them in your customers. In other words, it is about
helping to shape the largest and strongest market possible, and
then intensifying that market's reaction to its basic need or prob
lem, and to the "exclusive" solution vou have to offer it.

Ask Rodale Press--for whom I sold over twentv million dol
lars of a single book, The Practical Encyclopedia of Natural
Healing.

Ask the publisher of this book. Boardroom Reports, Inc.--
who started out with $3,500 in total working capital, and who
will probably do more than 25 million dollars in gross volume
next year, with I am proud to say at least a little bit of assistance
from me.

Ask the seventeen businesses I've started or helped start. . .
(Twenty-five percent of just one of them was sold for close to a
million dollars in one dav.)

These principles work. They discover markets. Thev build
markets. They intensify markets. Thev revitalize markets. They
perform, in sum, the invaluable function of giving you customers
for the products you want or have to sell.

And that's what we all need, isn't it? Customers. This, there

fore, is a book full of customers--for your products.

It is really nothing else. Just customers, by the millions.
Eighteen years have passed. Three lifetimes. They've been
good years, and good lives. I hadn't read the book since then, but


PREFACE

1A

some hidden part of me had remembered it, and I think it's worth
your reading now.

If vou agree with me, whv not write and tell me so. I have
several millionaires, and multimillionaires, to my credit now. I'd
like to make the next one YOU.

Please help me.

Gene Schwartz

DEDICATION

To BARBARA, who somehow, incredibly, still loves and always inspires me.


INTRODUCTION

Creativity Can Be Made to Order
If You Follow This Simple Rule

If you expect a scholarly tome on

advertising, stop here.

I am a mail order copy writer who makes his living by pro
ducing results--in carefully-measured dollars of profit--from the
written word.

My income--my standard of living--depends bluntly and di
rectly upon my ability to sell. And I have no salesmen to help
me; no store-reputation to help me: no point-of-purchase re
minders, no discounts, no friendly sales clerks to give mv prod
ucts a push.

I sell, or do not sell, on the basis of one tool alone--my ad
Therefore, I have done a great deal of thinking and experiment
ing with these ads. And, since I have had the good fortune to
own my own mail order firms for the last eleven years, I have
had far greater freedom than most copy writers to put mv ideas
to a conclusive test and to see whether or not they really work.
I believe, as do many other advertising men, that mail order
is the greatest copy writing school in the world. In mail order


INTRODUCTION

XI

for reasons which I'll reveal later in this book, YOU learn tech
niques and approaches to copy--especially new-product and newslant copy--that you learn in no other branch of this business.

Some of these techniques I have never seen discussed in anv
other article or book on copv writing--and I think I've read most
of them. I have explained these techniques in detail in the hope
that they will prove as profitable to other eopv writers as they've
been for me.

Can they be used by non-mail-order eopv writers as well?
Most assuredly. J. K. Lasker once said that mail order makes a
copy writer, but his real pav-off comes when he applies his mail
order techniques to general advertising. I think that B.B.D. & O.,
Ted Bates, Ogilvy, Young & Rubicam and a dozen other agencies
prove this every day.

Therefore I've written this book--not from the mail order
perspective alone--but from the universal problem of all eopv writ
ing: How to write a headline--and an ad that follows it--that will
open up an entirely new market for its product. An ad that will
give a new product immediate profit: that will give an old prod
uct a brand-new slant; that will give a competitively-battered prod
uct a new weapon--not onlv to protect itself against its imitators
but to actually damage or destrov the loyalty of their following.

These objectives cannot be achieved by following somebody
else's formula--no matter how successful it was for them. Thev
demand creativity Thev demand a brand-new headline; a brandnew approach to the market: a literal advertising "breakthrough."
Hence the title of this book.

This, then, is a practical book, of practical rules that pro
duce, and exploit, creativity, and that are meant to pay off on the
very first ad. To put them to work, vou start with these basic
facts.


INTRODUCTION

I N T R O Dl (

Basic Facts of Life for Copy Writers

Writing copy is like playing the stock market, or being an

atomic physicist.

Basically all three of these professions--eopv writing, spec
ulation and science--are exactly alike. The same keys make each
one of them work. And if you realize win. vou can double the
effectiveness of your copy overnight.

Consider these facts:

All three of them deal with immense natural forces
gar
gantuan forces thousands of times more powerful than the men
who use them. In science, they are the fundamental energies of
the universe. In speculation, they are the billion-dollar tides and
currents of the market place. In copy writing thetj are the hopes
and fears and desires of millions upon millions of men and women,
all over the world.

The men who use these forces did not create them; thev
can neither turn them on nor shut them off thev can neither di
minish them nor add to them. But they ran harness them! The
scientist did not create the energy of the sun; hut he can direct
that energy into the explosion of an atom bomb. The speculator
did not create the enormous growth of the electronics industry
after the war: but he can ride that growth to produce a fifty times
increase in his capital. And the copy writer does not create the
desire of millions of women all over America to lose weight; but
he can channel that desire onto a particular product, and make
its owner a millionaire.

This, then, is the end goal--to take these gigantic natural
forces and harness them to our own uses. But how do we do it?
No two of these forces are alike. Each is unique; each operates
in a different way The same formula, earefullv worked out to re
lease atomic energy, fails complete])- to solve the problem of
rocket propulsion. The same pattern of investment, that spots the
upturn in electronics and makes a fortune, loses that fortune in
uranium. And the same advertising appeal, that builds an in-


INTRODUCTION

™1

dustrv in reducing, collapses completely when applied to health
foods, even though both advertisements may reach exactly the
same audience.

Whv? Because no formula works

twice. Each and every
formula is simplv the written solution to a particular problem that
occurred in the past. Change even one part of that problem, and
vou need an entirelv different formula. That's why memorizing
theories won't make vou a scientist, or studying charts won't make
you a market wizard, or rewriting somebody else's headlines won't
make vou a copy writer.

What will work? Innovation, of course. Continuous, repeated
innovation. A steady stream of new ideas--fresh new solutions to
new problems. Created--not by the impossible route of mem
ory--but by analysis.

that determine

In afield in which

the outcome are constantly

the rales are constantly changing--where
shifting--
the forces
where new problems are constantly being encountered every day--
rules, formulas and principles simply will not work. They are too
the past. They must he replaced by
rigid--too
the Constantly New--
the only known method of dealing with
analysis.

tightly bound to

And what is analysis? It is a series of measuring rods, cheekthat show you where a particular force
points, signpost questions
is going, and enable you to get there first. It is a series of rough
guesses, based on past successes, that enables you to cut through
the surface of a problem to see what makes it tick. Analysis is
the art of asking the right questions and letting the problem dic
tate the right answers. It is the technique of the break-through.
And it can be learned--just as surely as grammar, mathematics
or spelling.

The first part of this book is about analysis, applied to the

profession of copy writing. Its basic thesis is this:

Everv new market--everv new product--every newadvertisement is a fresh new problem that never existed
before on the face of this earth. Past advertising successes


CONTENTS

PART 1: THE BASIC STRATEGY OF PERSUASION 1

1 MASS DESntE: THE FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING

WORK--AND HOW TO FOCUS IT ONTO YOUR PRODUCT 3
What Is This Mass Desire--and How Is It Created? 4
Permanent Forces 6
The Forces of Change 6
How to Channel Mass Desire Onto Your Particular Product 7
The Analysis of Your Product: What It Is--and What It Does 9

2 YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS--HOW TO

CAPITALIZE ON IT WHEN YOU WTUTE YOUR HEADLINE 13
Your Headline's Real Job 14
What Your Prospect's State of
Awareness Demands From Your Headline 15
The Most Aware 16
The Customer Knows of the
Product But Doesn't Yet Want It 16
How to Introduce New Products 79
How to Introduce Products That Solve Needs 21
How to Open Up a Completely Unaware Market 23
Giving Words to a Hidden Dream 26
Exploiting a Hidden Fear 27
Leading Into an Unacceptable Problem by
Starting With a Universally Accepted Image 28
To Project a Hidden Desire
Which Cannot Be Put Bluntly Into Words 29
Using a Common Resentment or Unvoiced Protest
to Capture a Far Greater Market Than the Direct
Statement of the Solution of That Resentment Would Produce 30
Projecting an Ultimate Triumph That the Prospect Will Identify With 32

xv


C O N T E N TS

Projecting the Result of a Problem in Such a Way
That It Will Be Identified With by People Who Would
Reject a Direct Statement of the Problem Itself 3.3
Projecting the Result of an Accomplishment
to Attract People Who Would Be Frightened Away
by the Work Implied to Achieve It 34
The List Never Ends 34
A Final Word on Style in Advertising Copy 35

3 THE SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR M4RKET:

HOW MANY PRODUCTS HAVE BEEN THERE BEFORE YOU? 37
If You Are First in Your Market 37
If You're Second, Do This 3.9
The Third Stage of Sophistication 41
The Fourth Stage 44
How to Revive a "'Dead" Product 45
Let's Look at an Industry That Went
Through All Five Stages of Sophistication 46
A Personal Note 50

4 38 WAYS TO STRENGTHEN YOUR HEADLINE

ONCE YOU HAVE YOUR BASIC D3EA 51

5 SUMMARY: THE ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING--

HOW TO MAKE AN IDEA GROW 59
The Three Levels of Creativity 5.9
On Motivation Research and Its Relation to the Copy Writer 61
On Expressing the Personality of a Product in Your Headline 63
On the Only Type of Prevention Headline That Will Sell 64
On the Selection of Splinter Markets to Avoid Competition 65
In Summary 66

PART 2: THE SEVEN BASIC TECHNIQUES OF
BREAKTHROUGH ADVERTISING 69

6 INSDDE YOUR PROSPECT'S MIND--WHAT MAKES

PEOPLE READ, WANT, BELDZVE 71
Desires 72
Identifications 73
Beliefs 74


CONTENTS

7 THE FTRST TECHNIQUE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY:

INTENSIFICATION 77
Thirteen Ways to Strengthen Desire 77
Your First Presentation of Your Claims HO
Put the Claims in Action 83
Bring In the Reader 85
Show Him How to Test Your Claims 86
Stretch Out Your Benefits in Time 87
Bring In an Audience 89
Show Experts Approving 90
Compare, Contrast, Prove Superiority 91
Picture the Black Side, Too 92
Show How Easy It Is To Get These Benefits 94
Use Metaphor, Analogy. Imagination 94
Before You're Done, Summarize 95
Put Your Guarantee to Work 99
How to Apply These Principles of Intensification to the Campaign 101

8 THE SECOND TECHNIQUE OF

BREAKTHROUGH COPY: IDENTIFICATION 107
How to Build a Saleable Personality Into Your Product 107
A Personal Note 108
The Roles Your Prospect Desires 109
Character Roles 110
Achievement Roles 113
How to Put These Longings for
Identification to Work for Your Product 114
The Primary Image of Your Product 117
How to Build New Images Into Your Product 119
On the Limits to the Images Your Prospects Will Identify With 124
On Saleable Identifications Springing From
the Physical Product Itself 125

9 THE TfflRD TECHNIQUE OF

BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION 129
How to Make Your Prospect Believe Your
Claims Before You State Them 729
What Exactly Is Belief? 130
The Architecture of Belief 133


C O N T E N TS

A New Definition of Awareness 134
A Detailed Example 135
How Belief Was Built Into the Opening 137
Goal Conclusions 139
The Ultimate Objective 141
A Restatement of Our Basic Theory 144
The Inclusion Question 145
Detailed Identification 145
Contradiction of Present (False) Beliefs 146
The Language of Logic 147
Syllogistic Thinking 149
Other Belief Forms 150

10 THE FOURTH TECHNIQUE OF

BREAKTHROUGH COPY: REDEFINITION 153
How to Remove Objections to Your Product 153
Simplification 155
Escalation 160
Price Reduction 162

11 THE FIFTH TECHNIQUE OF

BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION 165
How to Verbally Prove That Your Product Does What
You Claim 165
Verbal Proof 167
Stage One: Name the Mechanism 167
Stage Two: Describe the Mechanism 168
Stage Three: Feature the Mechanism 170
On the Importance of Mechanism When You Want
to Convince Your Reader That You're Giving Him a Bargain 171

12 THE SIXTH TECHNIQUE OF

BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CONCENTRATION 175
How to Destroy Alternate Ways for
Your Prospect to Satisfy His Desire 175
What Concentration Is 177
Let's See How He Does It 179
A Second Strategy 181
One Final Word on Concentration 184


CONTENTS

13 THE SEVENTH TECHNIQUE OF

BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CAMOUFLAGE 185
How to Borrow Conviction for Your Copy 185
Let's Look at a Few Examples 186
The Second Way to Borrow Believability 190
Believability-Borrowing Strategy #3 191

14 THE FINAL TOUCHES 195

202

Verification--How to Offer Authorities and Proof 196
Reinforcement--How to Make Two Claims Do the Work
of Four 200
Interweaving--How to Blend Emotion,
Image and Logic Into the Same Sentence
Sensitivity--How to Give Your Reader
What He Demands Step by Step Throughout the Copy 20o
Sample Ad #1 206
Sample Ad #2 210
Sample Ad #3 210
Sample Ad #4 211
See How the Structure Differs 214
Momentum--How to Draw Your
Reader Deeper and Deeper Into Your Copy 215
Mood--How to Pack Your Copy With Drama,
Excitement, Sincerity or Any Other Emotion You Wish

222

EPTLOGUE-A COPY WRITER'S LIBRARY 227

INDEX 229


PARTI
THE BASIC STRATEGY
OF PERSUASION
How to write a winning
headline that no one has
ever written before


1

MASS DESIRE:
THE FORCE THAT MAKES
ADVERTISING WORK
--AND HOW TO FOCUS
IT ONTO YOUR PRODUCT

Let's get right down to the heart
of the matter. The power, the force, the overwhelming urge to
own that makes advertising work, comes from the market itself,
and not from the copy. Copy cannot create desire for a product.
It can only take the hopes, dreams, fears and desires that already
exist in the hearts of millions of people, and focus those alreadyexisting desires onto a particular product. This is the copy writer's
task: not to create this mass desire--but to channel and direct it.
Actually, it would be impossible for any one advertiser to
spend enough money to actually create this mass desire. He can
only exploit it. And he dies when he tries to run against it.

This has been shown time and time again in the automotive
field, for example. In 1948, in order to display their rising stan
dard of living, the American public decided they wanted a longer,
lower, wider car. Chrysler chose to buck the trend; and offered a


4

MASS DESIRE: T HE FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

the

inside--but shorter and squatter on

leg and shoulder room
fine, functional car--with more head,
on
the outside. A
multimillion-dollar campaign was prepared bv one of the most
creative agencies in America. But the results--against the tide of
mass desire--were catastrophic.

In 1954, cars had become universallv long; and drivers were
appraising each other's car in terms of horsepower. Here was the
rise to dominance of a vast new public demand. The Twin-H
Hudson Hornet, the twin-exhaust Cadillac, the Chrysler 300--all
in turn exploited this trend, and rode it to gain millions of dol
lars in extra sales. The Ford Company decided to plav it down,
and devoted millions of advertising dollars to sell safety. Again,
the advertising ran into a wall of disinterest: results were non
existent; and the next year Ford produced, and advertised, the
highest-horsepower engines in their history

YVut perhaps \Vie most pamTu\ prooY was the Edsel. H e re was
a good car, backed by a deluge of fhu< advertising, that died try
ing to fight the overwhelming switch
in demand to a cheap,
simple, inexpensive-to-run compact car.

Let me repeat. This mass desire must already be there. It
must already exist. You cannot create it. and vou cannot fight it.
But you can--and must--direct
it onto your
product.
particular

it, channel

it. focus

What Is This Mass Desire--and How Is It Created?

We can define this Mass Desire quite simply. It is the pub

lic spread of a private want.

Advertising is a business of statistics. We deal with percent
ages of population. We address our ads to individuals; and yet
the success of our advertising depends on thousands, or even mil
lions, of these individuals sharing the same response to these
ads--the response of wanting our product enough to pav us the
price we ask for it.


MASS DESIRE: T HE FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

5

shared by a

is
large enough

Before these individuals can share this buying response,
they must first share the desire upon which our ad is based.
Privately, each of them wants the same thing. Puhliclx. there
are enough of them to repay us the cost of advertising, manu
facturing and selling, plus a profit. It is the moment alien a pri
number of
vate desire
people,
these people,
that a market is born. This market mav consist of a desire shared
by only a few thousand people, such as the urge to own fine
antiques. Or it may be shared by tens of millions, as the desire
to lose weight. But it is there, demanding to be satisfied, wait
ing only for the information that will direct it onto a particular
product.

significant
selling

to profitably

statistically

repay

Since these mass desires are shared bv millions of people.
they take years to develop, and thev are created b\ social, eco
nomic and technological forces far greater than advertising itself
can command. It is this fact, when used correctly that gives ad
vertising its enormous potential for profit. Bv simplv directing
this gigantic, already-existing mass desire--rather than being re
quired to create it--advertising thus commands an economic force
hundreds of times more poiveifnl Hum
the mere number of dol
lars that the advertiser can spend on
it. This is the Amplification
Effect of successful advertising--the reason that $1 spent on such
advertising can create 850 or even SI00 in sales.

But this Amplification Effect takes place only when advertis
ing exploits already-existing desire. When it tries to create this de
sire, it is no longer advertising but education. And, as education.
it can produce at best only one dollar in sales for every dollar
spent on advertising. No single advertiser can afford to educate
the American public. He must rely on forces far greater than any
advertising budget to build this mass desire. And then he can
make those forces work for him--by directing that desire onto his
particular product.

What are

this mass
desire? There are many of them. But they fall into two general

these nation-wide forces

that create


6

MASS DESIRE: T HE FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

categories--each presenting its distinct problem to the copy writer.
Here are these two categories, with a few specific examples of
each.

1. Permanent Forces

Mass Instinct. The desire of women to be attractive, or men
to be virile, or men and women both to keep their health. In
this case, the instinct never fades--the desire never changes. The
copy writer's problem here is not to pick out the trend--it is
there for everyone to see. His job is to distinguish his product
from the others that were there before it--to create a fresh ap
peal--to build a stronger believabilitv--to shift desire from the
fulfillment offered by one product to that offered bv another.
How this is done, we shall see in a moment.

A mass technological problem. Bad television reception, or
corroding automobile mufflers, or the time it takes for aspirin to
bring relief. Until the problem is finallv solved, the customers
will buy and try--buy and try again. And here the copy writer
has the same problem--to offer the same claim of relief as his
competitors, but offer it in a new way.

2. The Forces of Change

The beginning, the fulfillment, and the reversal of a trend.
Style. The sudden mass decision to show off a pay raise bv in
stalling a swimming pool in the back yard, instead of buying a
bigger car. The horsepower appeal of the Fifties, and its sudden
subordination to gas economy. Here the copv writer is dealing
with the straws in the wind that may indicate a hurricane. Here
he needs sensitivity, foresight, intuition. He must be able to see
and catch the rising tide when it's almost imperceptible--sense
which of the several appeals that are built into his product he
should stress at any particular moment, and when to shift to an
other--and, always, how to be there first.


MASS DESIRE: T HE FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

trickling down

to every hamlet

Mass Education. The school primer and the movie screen.
The tastes and appearances of society women, television stars,
in
presidential candidates,
America. Group pressure; back-yard gossip; community product
pioneers. And equally important, the sum total of all advertis
ing--in its unconscious, unplanned and overall effect of multi
plying people's dreams and desires, and thus raising their stan
dard of living. Here again the problem is timing. When does the
shift become statistically significant? When do enough people make
the change? When should the automotive powerhouse, for ex
ample, change its image to become the common man's gas saver?
The copy writer is faced with a society containing dozens--
even hundreds--of these already-existing mass desires. His first
joh therefore is to detect them--inventory them--chart their force
and direction. This is a study that will occupy part of every work
ing dav for the rest of his life.

His second job is to harness his products onto their backs.

He does this in this wav:

How to Channel Mass Desire
Onto Your Particular Product

The copy writer in his work uses three tools: his own knowl
edge of people's hopes, dreams, desires and emotions; his client's
product; and the advertising message, which connects the two.
The copy writer performs his work in three stages. In gen

eral, thev go something like this:

1. Choose the most powerful desire that can possibly he ap

plied to your product.

Every mass desire has three vital dimensions. The first is ur
gency, intensity, degree of demand to be satisfied. For example,
constant arthritic pains compared to a minor headache. The sec
ond dimension is staving power, degree of repetition, the inabil
ity to become satiated. For example, raw hunger compared to a
craving for gourmet foods. And the third dimension is scope--


ft>

MASS DESIRE: T HE FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

the number of people who share this desire. For example, the
number of men willing to pay $10 for an automotive accessorv
that saves gas--as compared to those willing to pav the same
price for one that merely prevents future repair bills.

Every product appeals to two, three or four of these mass
desires. But only one can predominate; onlv one can reach out
through your headline to your customer. Only one is the key that
unlocks the maximum economic power at the particular time your
advertisement is published. Your choice among these alternate de
sires is the most important step yon will take in writing your ad.
If it is wrong, nothing else that you do in the ad will matter. This
choice is embodied in your headline. It is for this reason that we
spend so many chapters on headlines later on.

To sum up the first stage then, you trv to choose the mass
desire that gives you the most power in all three dimensions. You
try to tap a single overwhelming desire existing today in the hearts
and minds of millions of people who are actively seeking to sat
isfy it at this verv moment.

2. Acknowledge that desire--reinforce it--and/or offer the
means to satisfy it--in a single statement in the headline of
your ad.

This headline is the bridge between vour prospect and your
product. It touches your prospect at the point of awareness that
he has arrived at today. If he is aware of vour product, and re
alizes that it can satisfy his desire, vour headline starts with vour
product. If he is not aware of your product, but only of the de
sire itself, your headline starts with the desire. And, if he is not
yet aware of what he really seeks, but is concerned only with a
general problem, your headline starts with that problem and crys
tallizes it into a specific need.

In any case, your headline--though it mav never mention
your product--is the first vital step in recognizing this mass de
sire--justifying and intensifying it--and directing its solution along
one specific path.

3. And then you take the series of performances that are


MASS DESIRE: T HE FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

9

into your product--what your product does--and you show
satisfy

these product performances

inevitably

built
your prospect how
that desire. Here's how:

The Analysis of Your Product:
What It Is--and What It D o es

In reality, every product vou are given to sell is actually two
products. One of them is the physical product--the steel, glass,
paper or tobacco that the manufacturer has shaped into a par
ticular pattern, of which he is justly proud. The other is the func
tional product--the product in action--the series of benefits that
vour product performs for vour consumer, and on the basis of
which he buys vour product.

The physical product does not sell. People do not buy the
steel in a car, the glass in a vase, the tobacco in a cigarette, or
the paper in a book.

The physical part of your product is of value only because
it enables your product to do things for people. The important
part of your product is what it does. The rest--the steel skele
ton--the chrome or metal case that vou actually deliver to your
customer--is only your excuse for charging them your price. What
they are reallv paying you for is what the product will do.

No physical part of vour product can ever become a head
line. No one will buy the size of vour clients plant, the weight
of vour client's steel, the care of vour client's construction. All
these facts can only be used, later on. to document and reinforce
the primary performance that vou promise your reader in your
headline, in the following wavs:

By justifying your price. This

is

the common-sense

theory

that the longer the car, the more tubes in the television set, the
more stitches per inch in the suit, then the greater the number
of dollars your product can command--if that product first de
livers the performance that your prospect demands.

By documenting

the quality of your performance. Tell your


10

MASS DESIRE: T HE F O R CE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

prospect the weight of steel in vour car's door, and he's more
likely to believe that your car will protect his life if he should
have an accident on the highway. Tell vour prospect the number
of times your plant removes the impurities in vour face cream,
and she's more likely to believe that vour cream will remove the
impurities in her skin.

By assuring your prospect that that performance will con
tinue throughout the years. Ceramic mufflers mean no repair bills
for the life of your car. Chemically-protected paper means you
can hand your prize books down to vour children. Quick-frozen
food means vou can retain taste and vitamins for months after
your purchase.

By sharpening the reader's mental picture of that perfor
mance. The Rolls-Royce must give vou perfect riding silence be
cause every metal part of the chassis is shielded from every other
metal part by a protective coat of rubber. Helena Rubenstein's
new face cream must make your skin look younger because it
contains the placenta of living animals.

And, above all, by giving your product's claim of performance
afresh new basis for believability. This is the most important use
of the physical product in fields where a new firm or product is
attempting to invade an established Mass Instinct field. Others
have made the same claim before. Your product, in order to pull
sales awav from them, must introduce a new mechanism that per
forms the claim, or a new quality that assures its performance,
or a new freedom from old limitations that improves the perfor
mance. This is the point of difference--often conceived by the
copy writer, and built bv the manufacturer into the product at
his recommendation. We shall discuss this point of difference
quite thoroughly in the next few chapters.

So much for the physical product. It is always subordinated
to the functional product--the product in action--what the prod
uct does.

It is the performance of your product, satisfying the mass
desire of your market, that provides the selling power of your ad.


MASS DESIRE: T HE FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

11

in studying your product,

is to list the
Your first task, then,
it contains--to group these
number of different performances
performances against the mass desires that each of them satis
fies--and then to feature the one performance that will harness
the greatest sales power onto vour product at that particular time.

Take the automobile, for example. Every automobile offers
its prospective owner several different and distinct sets of
performances:

It offers him transportation. The ability to carry himself, his
family, his luggage, and perhaps tin the case of station wagons)
his pets and his furniture from place to place.

It offers him dependability. The freedom from breakdown,
stalling, poor performance, repair bills, embarrassment and incon
venience.

It offers him economy. Inexpensive transportation: savings in
both gas and oil; freedom from repair bills, seen this time from
the point of view of the pocket book: durability high trade-in
value, low insurance cost.

It offers him power. Number of horses at his command; take
off at the lights: acceleration on hills and in traffic; top speed,
even if he never uses it. All adding up to a feeling of dominance
on the highway.

It offers him recognition. Admiration, status, subtle and ac
cepted bragging, envy, the feeling of having arrived. The ohs and
ahs of his neighbors, the first ride, the very smell of a new car.
It offers him value. The number of feet of steel he can com
mand for the price. High trade-in value over the years. The fact
that the car can last for 100,000 miles, even if he can afford to
trade it in every year.

It offers him novelty: Power steering five vears ago--elec
tric door locks todav. Three-tone paint jobs vesterdav--iridescent
paints now. The thrill of being the leader, the pace-setter, the
proven pioneer.

And man\- more. Some of them hidden, never admitted,
discovered only recently bv motivation research. Dozens of


VZ

M A SS DESIRE: T HE FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

different performances, built into the same product, each of
them reaching out and tapping a different desire--a distinct
public.

And yet your ad can feature onlv one of these performances;

can effectively tap only one mass desire at a time.

Your headline is limited by physical space. You have onlv

one glance of the reader's eye to stop him. He is preoccupiedhe is not looking for your product or your message--the span of
his attention will admit only one thought to penetrate his indif
ference during that glance.

If your first thought holds him. he will read the second. If
the second holds him, he will read the third. And if the third
thought holds him, he will probably read through your ad.

Every product gives you dozens of keys. But onlv one will

fit the lock. Your job is to find that one dominant performance
squeeze every drop of power out of it in your presentation--and
then convince your reader that that performance and that satis
faction can come onlv from your product.

The next four chapters will show von how to locate that one
dominant performance, and how to fasliion it into vour headline.
Once you have written that headline, then even other perfor
mance contained in your product simply reinforces and docu
ments that main appeal, in exactly the same wav as the physical
product facts listed above.


2
YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE
OF AWARENESS--HOW TO
CAPITALIZE ON IT W H EN
YOU WRITE YOUR
HEADLINE

You have now completed the first
two stages in writing your ad. You have defined the mass desire
that makes up your market--for example, the desire to lose weight,
shared by millions of women all over America. And you have se
lected the one performance in vour product that satisfies that de
sire most deeply--for example, a liquid meal in a glass, delicious,
filling, already measured for you. as easy and pleasant to drink
as a chocolate malted.

This definition of vour market, and the selection of the prod
uct performance most likely to capture that market, forms the
core concept, or theme, of vour ad. You now know where you
are going to start--with your market; and where you are going
to end--with your product. The bridge between these two--their
meeting place--is your ad.

Your ad always begins with your market, and leads that

13


14

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

market inevitably into your product. The beginning of vour ad--
your headline--is the first step in this process. Therefore it con
cerns itself entirely with your market. It mav never even mention
your product or its performance. It is based entirely on the an
swer to these three questions:

1. What is the mass desire that creates this market? (Which

we have already discovered.)

2. How much do these people know today about the way

your product satisfies this desire? (Their State of Awareness.)

3. How many other products have been presented to them

before yours? (Their State of Sophistication.

The answer to question 1 gives von the nation-wide force
that creates your market. The answer to questions 2 and 3 gives
you the location of that market in relation to vour product. Your
strategy for exploiting or overcoming the answers to these last
two questions will give you the content of vour headline. Let's
first re-define the job we are going to ask our headline to do,
and then see how each of these last two questions tells us what
that headline should--and should not--saw

Your Headline's Real Job

There has been much confusion about how much of a sell
ing job your headline should be required to do. Actually, your
headline does not need to sell at all. It does not have to mention
your product. It does not even have to mention vour main ap
peal. To demand that a headline should do any of these is to
place the full selling burden on approximately 10% to 20% of
the total physical space of your ad . . . that physical space taken
up by the headline itself.

Your headline has only one job--to stop your prospect and
compel him to read the second sentence of your ad. In exactly
the same way, your second sentence has only one job--to force
him to read the third sentence of vour ad. And the third sentence


YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

15

--and every additional sentence in your ad--has exactly the
same job.

It is simply common sense that the more of vour storv vou
can force your prospect to read, the more thoroughly you can sell
him. To attempt to do the same selling job in ten words, instead
of a hundred, or a thousand, is to shoot craps with vour clients
money. You might as well bnv only enough space to print vour
headline, and use the rest of the budget for repeat insertions.

It is the copy writer's job to force the prospect to read his
client's full story--not just a skimmed version of it. Only to
prospects actively seeking the client's specific brand-name prod
uct, and in a case where you can offer them a special price re
duction, can your headline do the full selling job. To attempt a
complete selling job with anv other kind of headline is simply to
admit defeat.

What Your Prospect's State of
Awareness Demands From Your Headline

We have already assumed that the only reader you are look
ing for is the prospect for vour product. That means that he
shares a defined desire with thousands, and perhaps even mil
lions, of other people all over America. But how much aware is
that prospect of that desire? How close is it to the surface of his
consciousness? Is he aware only that a problem or need exists,
or is he aware if they can be satisfied? And if he is aware that
a means of satisfaction exists, does he realize that it lies in your
iiroup of products, or specifically in your product by name, or
more specifically in your product at a given price?

The answer to these questions will help you determine the
State of Awareness of your market--their present state of knowl
edge about your product and the satisfaction that your product
performs. It is at this precise point of awareness that vour head
line begins.


16

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

In its natural development, everv market's awareness passes
through several stages. The more aware your market, the easier
the selling job, the less vou need to sav. Let's go down the aware
ness scale step by step. We'll start at the Most Aware--the most
mechanical selling job--and proceed to more and more difficult
problems, requiring more and more creative solutions.

1. The Most Aware

The customer knows of your product--knows what it does--
knows he wants it. At this point, he just hasn't gotten around to
buying it yet. Your headline--in fact, vour entire ad--need state
little more except the name of your product and a bargain price.
For example:

"Revere Zomar Lens, Electric Eve Camera--Formerly

$149.50--Now Only $119.95."

The remainder of the advertisement can summarize quicklv
the most desirable selling points. Then add the name of a store,
or a coupon, and close.

This is the typical department store, discount store, mail
order-bargain-catalog type of advertising. It takes advantage of
the full weight of all the advertising that has been done on the
same product before it. Its addition--its news--is the price--or
a free gift--or instant delivery--or proximity in the neighbor
hood. Its prospect is fully aware--he has all the information he
needs. Here the copy writer is nothing more than the merchan
dise manager's phrase-maker. The price is the most important
part of his headline. There is nothing creative about his job, and
he should receive the lowest possible scale of pav.

2. The Customer Knows of the Product
But Doesn't Yet Want It

Here, your prospect isn't completely aware of all your prod
uct does, or isn't convinced of how well it does it, or hasn't yet
been told how much better it does it now.


YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

17

Here--in the approach to this market--is the great bulk of
all advertising. Here you are dealing with a product which is
known--which has established a brand name--which has alreadylinked itself with an acknowledged public desire, and has proven
that it satisfied that desire.

Here vour headline is faced with one of seven tasks:
(a) To reinforce your prospects desire for your product:
(b) To sharpen his image of the way vour product satisfies

that desire;

(c) To extend his image of where and when vour product

satisfies that desire;

(d) To introduce new proof, details, documentation of how

well vour product satisfies that desire;

(e) To announce a new mechanism in that product to en

able it to satisfy that desire e\-en better;

(f) To announce a new mechanism in vour product that elim

inates former limitations;

(g) Or to completely change the image or the mechanism of
that product, in order to remove it from the competition of other
products claiming to satisfy the same desire.

In all seven cases, the approach is the same. You display the
name of the product--either in the headline or in an equally
large logo--and use the remainder of the headline to point out
its superioritv. The body of the ad is then an elaboration of that
superiority--including visualization, documentation, mechaniza
tion. When you have finished weaving in everv strand of vour
product's superiority7, your ad is done.

Here are sample headlines presenting solutions to all seven

of the problems of this state of awareness:

(a) To reinforce your prospect's desire for your product--

bv using:

ASSOCIATION:

"Steinway--The Instrument of the Immortals."
"Jov--The Costliest Perfume in the World."


18

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

EXAMPLE:

"Which Twin Has the Toni?"
"Hair Coloring So Natural Only Her Hairdresser

Knows For Sure--Miss Clairol."

SENSORY SHARPEN I \ 0:

"Tastes like you just picked it--Dole."
"The skin YOU love to touch--Woodbury"

ILLUSTRATION:

(Anyone of the thousands of superb pictorial ads in the food,
fashion, cosmetic, jewelry and similar industries. Perhaps best
summed up by Life Saver's classic headline. "Please don't lick
this page.")

(b) To sharpen your prospect's image of the way your product
satisfies that desire (Much like the sensory shaipening illustrated
above; but concentrating here on the physical product itself, or on
the mechanism bv which it works):

"At 60 miles an hour, the loudest noise in a Rolls

Royee is the electric clock."

"The amazing story of a Zippo that worked after

being taken from the bellv of a fish."

(c) To extend his
that desire:

satisfies

image of where and when your product

"Anywhere you go. Hertz is always nearby"
"Thirst knows no season"--in a winter ad, at a time

when cold drinks were only consumed during the summer--"Coca Cola."

(d) To

introduce new proof, details, documentation of how

we,

11 your product satisfies

that desire:

"9 out of 10 screen stars use Lux Toilet Soap for

their priceless smooth skins."


YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

19

"Jake La Motta, 160-lb fighter, fails to flatten Mono

paper cup."

"In Boston, the #1 tea-drinking citv, the #1 tea is

Salada."

(e) To announce a new mechanism

in that product to enable

it to satisfy that desire even better:

"Hoovers new invention washes floors and vacuums

up the scrub water."

"Worlds only dog food that makes its own gravy--

Gaines Graw Train."

(f) To announce a new mechanism
limitations:

former

inates

in

i/onr product that elim

"You breathe no dustv odors when YOU do it with

Lewvt."

"A new Zenith hearing aid--inconspicuous beyond

belief."

(g) Or to completely change the

the product,
products claiming

in order to remove
to satisfy

it from
the same desire.

image or the mechanism of
the competition of other

Here we are dealing with the State of Sophistication of our
market--the amount of exposure they have already had to simi
lar products. Every product during its life history encounters this
problem. All of Chapter 3 will be devoted to some of the ap
proaches to its solution.

We now move on to the less aware markets--with their more
difficult copv challenges, and their greater demand for the unpre
cedented.

3. How to Introduce N ew Products

The prospect either knows, or recognizes

immediately,
the product does; but he doesn't yet know'
it for him.

is a product--your product--that will do

he wants what
there

that
that


20

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

Here the problem is two-fold. First, to pinpoint the illthat is slowly spreading
defined, as-vet-uncrvstallized desire
through great masses of people all over America. And second,
to crystallize that desire, and its solution, so sharplv and so dra
matically that each and every prospect will recognize it at a
glance.

The three steps in the process are simple. Name the desire
and/or its solution in vour headline. Prove that that solution can
be accomplished. And show that the mechanism of that accom
plishment is contained in vour product.

However, starting with a market in this still-amorphous state
of awareness, and continuing with each of the more difficult chal
lenges to come, the execution becomes more and more important
than the mechanics. Here the eopv writer contributes more and
more to the value of the product in the public eve, and to its
total volume of sales. Here the innovator comes into play. Here
the ratio of salary of copy writer to production supervisor shoots
up abruptly. For this is the domain of the idea man.

What are the attributes he needs0
First, analysis. As a copy writer vou will find it necessary to
define the particular market most receptive to vour product, its
location in relation to your product in terms of awareness and
sophistication, and the driving emotional forces that have created
both that market and the potential for the sales of vour product
within it.

Second, intuition, which may be described as the ability to
sense a trend at its start, gauge its force and direction, deter
mine the precise moment when it burgeons into a profitable
market.

And third, verbal creativity, as discussed in the next three
chapters, and throughout the rest of the book. The ability to give
a name to the still-undefined. To capture a feeling, a hope, a de
sire, a fear in words. To create a catchword or a slogan. To focus
emotion, and give it a goal.

Let us see how great writers in the past have taken these


YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

21

amorphous desires, and brought them into razor-sharp focus in
a single statement in their headline:

"Light a Lucky, and vou'll never miss sweets that make

you fat."

"Who else wants a whiter wash--with no hard work':""

"How to win friends and influence people.

"To men who want to cjuit work some day.

"When doctors feel rotten--this is what they do.'

"Now! Run your car without spark plugs''
"Who ever heard of 17,000 />/<>om* ironi a single plant0"

And dozens more. Here, amorphous desire has been crys
tallized in the headline. Then sharpened and expanded in the
first few paragraphs; satisfied and documented in the body of the
ad: and focussed inevitably on the product throughout.

Sometimes the simplest statement of the desire is the best.
"How to win friends and influence people" needs no verbal twist
to increase its impact. At other times, the desire itself must be
reinforced by fresh proof that it can be achieved, "When doctors
feel rotten--this is what they do". Or by mystery, "Now! Run
your car without spark plugs!" Or by wonderment, "Who ever
heard of 17,000 blooms from a single plant?". The next two chap
ters will discuss, first, the strategy of determining when to use a
fresh approach; and second, how- to sharpen that first statement
of desire with verbalization.

4. H ow to Introduce Products That Solve Needs

The prospect has--not a desire--but a need. He recognizes
the connection

immediately. But he doesn't yet realize

the fulfillment of that need and your product.

the need
between

This is the problem-solving ad. It might be thought of as a
special case of the desire ad mentioned above, since the tech-


'Z'Z

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

nique of writing it is so similar. H e re you start bv naming the
need and/or its solution in your headline. Then dramatize the
need so vividly that the prospect realizes just how badlv he needs
the solution. And then present your product as the inevitable
solution.

Again, this type of ad runs from the most naked statement
of the need alone, to the most complicated verbal twists to bring
it to the peak of impact. To start at the beginning, the most ef
fective possible headline for your particular problem mav be as
simple as this:

"Corns?"

Here, only the problem itself is mentioned--nothing more.

Or it may be necessary to state both problem and solution im
mediately:

"Stops maddening itch."

Many headlines in this category promise the removal of pre
viously unconquerable limitations. They are especially popular in
catalog selling:

"Lets portable transistor radios play on ordinary house

hold current."

And many combine all three elements--the problem, its so

lution, and the removal of the usually expected limitations:

"Shrinks hemorrhoids without surgerv."

There are headlines which promise substitutes for unpleas

ant or expensive tasks:

"Now! A ring and piston job in a tube!"


YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

^o

And there are headlines which promise to prevent a future

problem, before it can occur:

"Look, Mom! No cavities!"

But many times the problem is not so clearly defined, not
so obviously on the surface. You may know the general area of
the problem--for example, people's embarrassment at speaking
poor English. But you may not be sure of which avenue is the
most effective in reaching them. Here the emphasis of a single
w o rd--the emotional sharpening of an already easily-identified
image--provides the answer:

"Do YOU make these mistakes in English0"

And, where the solution to the need has been promised
before--where the direct statement of the solution has lost its
force and freshness--then verbal twists are needed to restore that
novelty:

"How a bald-headed barber helped save my hair."

5. How to Open Up a Completely Unaware Market

And finally--the most difficult. The prospect is either not
aware of his desire or his need--or he won't honestly admit it to
himself without being lead into it by your ad--or the need is so
general and amorphous that it resists being summed up in a single
headline--or it's a secret that just can't be verbalized.

This is the outer reach of the awareness scale. These are the
people who are still the logical prospects for your product; and
vet, in their own minds, they are hundreds of miles away from
accepting that product. It is your job to bridge that gap.

Let me repeat what I said when we first began to explore
these five stages of awareness. Each of these stages is separated
from the others by a psychological wall. On one side of that wall
is indifference; on the other, intense interest. A headline that


24

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

will work wonders in the first stage-for example, "Dial Soap-90
a cake - w i ll fail completely when addressed to a third-stage
market where your prospect doesn't even realize that soaps can
be made with built-in deodorants. And a third-stage headlinefor example "Who else wants a whiter wash with no hard work?"
- w i ll be old-hat, no-news to todays housewife, who has been
barraged by whiter-than-white advertising for twenty years

To sum up, then.- a headline which will work to'a market in
one stage of awareness will not work to a market in another
stage of awareness. Nor will it work, even to a market in which
it has been successful, once that market passes on to a new stage
ot awareness.

b

Most products are designed to satisfy a specific need or
desire. They are born into markets that are m at least the third
or fourth stages of awareness. They may therefore never be faced
with the problem of an unaware market.

However, many products actually pass out of public aware
ness or out of public acceptance-at some time or other dur
ing their hfe histories. The desire they satisfy dries up, or other
products serve it better, or they are branded "old-fashioned "

Again, we are dealing with a matter of statistics. When a
product begins to slip . . . when volume falls off, even though ad
vertising budgets are increased . . . when the name of the prod
uct no longer sells as much . . . when a direct statement of the
product s function no longer sells as much . . . when a direct state
ment of the desire or the need that the product fulfills no longer
sells as much-then that product needs to be reborn, and its prob
lem is the problem of opening up an unatvare market

Again, this is the most difficult, the most challenging probem of a 1. There are few positive milestones to guide vou But
fortunately there are some completely self-evident negative rules
that can eliminate many blind alleys, and set you face to face
against your task. Planning a headline for a completely unaware
or resistant market, then, is first of all a process of elimination'
Here are the first paths:


YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

1. Price means nothing to a person who does not know your
product, or want your product. Therefore, eliminate all mention
of price, or price reduction, in your headline or prime display

25

type.

2. The name of vour product means nothing to a person
who has never seen it'before, and may actually damage your ad
if you have had a bad model the year before, or if it is now as
sociated with the antiquated, the unfashionable, or the unpleas
ant. Therefore, keep vour product out of the headline, and be
extremely wary about'breaking the mood or disguise of your ad
with a prominent logo.

3. And this is the hardest fact of all to accept. At this stage
of your market, a direct statement of what your product does,
what desire it satisfies, or what problem it sokes, simply will not
work. Your product either has not reached that direct stage, or
has passed beyond it. And vou cannot simply shift from one de
sire to another. You are not faced here with a problem of so
phistication, but one of complete indifference, or unacceptability. Therefore, the performance of vour product, and the desire
it'satisfies, can only be brought in later. You cannot mention them
in vour headline.

' So vou cannot mention price, product, function or desire.
What do vou have left? Your market, of course! And the distinct
possibility that by broadening vour appeal beyond price, product
function or specific desire, vou can reach the maximum limits of
your full potential market; consolidate splinter appeals; and in
crease the sales of vour product at a fantastic rate.

Once you have accepted the challenge of writing this kind
of ad, then vour product and its attributes fade into the back
ground, and'you concentrate exclusively on the state of mind of
vour market at this particular moment.
' What vou are doing essentially in this fifth stage is calling
uour market together in the headline of your ad. You are writ
ing an identification headline. You are selling nothing, promising
nothing, satisfying nothing. Instead, you are echoing an emotion,


YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

an attitude, a ^satisfaction that picks people out from the crowd
and binds them together in a single statement.

In this type of headline, you are telling them what thev are
You are defining them for themselves. You are giving them the
information they need and want, about a problem still so vague
that you are the first to put it into words.

Here, above all, is the type of headline that never attempts
to sell a product or a performance, but simplv tries to sell the
remainder of the ad itself--the information that follows on the
page. The only function of this headline is to get the prospect to
read the next paragraph. And this second paragraph pulls him
into the third; and the third into the fourth: and right on down
the page, paragraph after paragraph.

Meanwhile these paragraphs are building a steady progres
sion of logical images, from the first identification with'the head
line, to a growing awareness of the problem or the desire
to
the realization that a solution is at hand, and to the inevitable
focussing of that desire and that solution onto your particular
product.

This, then, is the general strategy of dealing with an unaware
market. The application of this strategy, when all direct methods
have failed, has produced hundreds of great headlines. It would
be impossible to classify all of them, since each solution estab
lishes its own new pattern. However, there are definite landmarks
and directions we can distinguish. Here are some of them--start
ing with the general principle they used, then the problem thev
solved, then the headline itself, and then the most important
structural paragraph of body copy:

Giving Words to a Hidden Dream

Problem: to expand the market for home correspondence
courses beyond that obtained by "Earn more money" and "Gain
more skill" headlines. The solution:


YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

27

THE UNIVERSITY OF THE NIGHT

The voung Lincoln, poring over borrowed school-books
far into the night--seeking in the dim light of bis log fire
the transforming light of knowledge--eager to grow--eager
to do . . . here is an example which has inspired the man
who strives against the odds of circumstances to make his
place in the world.

To-night, in cities and towns and villages . . . thousands
of men will drop their daily labors to fight, beneath the
lamp, the battle that Lincoln fought. . .

Up from the mines, down from the masts of ships . . .
from all the places where men work, they will go home
and take up their books because they yearn to grow, be
cause thev seek higher training, greater skill, more re
sponsibility . . .

Some of them are men who work in one field whereas
their talents and desires are in another. Some . . . are halted
in their progress because they do not understand the higher
principles of their business or profession. Some left school
in bovhood because poverty made it necessary . . .

Fifty years ago these men . . . would have had no place
to turn for the courses of study and for the personal guid
ance that they need.

Thirty vears ago there was founded a school to help
them--a school created for their needs and circumstances--
a school that goes to them no matter where they are--a
school. . .

Created in response to a need, the International Cor
respondence Schools have developed their scope and use
fulness to the growth of that need . . .

Exploiting a Hidden Fear

Problem: To re-vitalize the sales of a coffee substitute, long
after health headlines and pep headlines and taste headlines had
failed. Secondary problem: To overcome a slipping brand name,
that was no longer an asset in either the headline or the logo.
The solution:


28

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

WHY MEN CRACK.. .

An authority of international standing recently wrote;
"You have overeaten and plugged vour organs with mod
erate stimulants, the worst of which are not onlv alcohol
and tobacco, but caffeine and sugar . . ."

You know them. Strong men. vigorous men, robust
men--men who have never had a sick dav in their lives.
They drive. They drive themselves to the limit. They lash
themselves over the limit with stimulants. Thev crack. Often,
the\- crash.

You have seen them afterwards. Pitiful shells. The zest

gone, the fire gone. Burnt-out furnaces of energy.

"He was such a healthy-looking man
He was. His health was his undoing. His constitution
absorbed punishment. Otherwise he might have been
warned in time.

"

"For every action there is an equal and contrary reac
tion." You learned the law in physics. It applies to bodies.
For every ounce of energy gained bv stimulation, bv
whipping the nerves to action, an ounce of reserve strength
is drained . .. But repeated withdrawals exhaust anv reserve.
Physical bankruptcy. Then the crash . ..

It's time to get back to normal, to close the drafts, to

bank some of the fires...

Avoid stimulants. What is good for the bov is good for

the man . ..

Borrowed Energy Must Be Repaid!
Two million American families avoid caffeine bv drink
ing Postum. And two million American families are better
off for it. . .

Leading Into an Unacceptable Problem by Starting
With a Universally Accepted Image

Problem: To gain both publisher and prospect acceptance
for a woman's deodorant. A direct statement of the performance
or product would not only offend, but would never be published.
The solution:


YOUR PROSPECT S STATE OF AWARENESS

29

WITHIN THE CURVE OF A WOMAN'S ARM

A frank discussion of a subject too often avoided.
A woman's arm! Poets have sung of its grace: artists

have painted its beautv.

It should be the daintiest, sweetest thing in the world.

And vet, unfortunatelv. it isn't, alwavs.

There's an old offender in this quest for perfect dain
tiness--an offender of which we ourselves niav be ever so
unconscious, but which is just as truly present.

Shall we discuss it frankly?
Many a woman who savs, "No, I am never annoved

by perspiration," does not know the facts . . .

Of course, we aren't to blame because nature has made
us so that the perspiration glands under the arms are more
active than anywhere else. Nor are we to blame because . . .
have made normal evaporation there impossible.

Would you be absolutely sure of your daintiness?
It is the chemicals of the body, not uncleanliness, that
cause odor. And even though there is no active perspira
tion--no apparent moisture--there may be under the arms
an o d o r . ..

Fastidious women who want to be absolutely sure of
their daintiness have found that thev could not trust to
their own consciousness; they have felt the need of a toi
let water which would insure them against any of this kind
of underarm unpleasantness, either moisture or odor.

To meet this need, a physician formulated Odorono--

a perfectly harmless and delightful toilet water . . .

To Project a Hidden Desire Which
Cannot Be Put Bluntly Into Words

Problem: To capitalize on research findings that smoking cig
arettes gives men a feeling of virilitv, importance, sexual strength.
Any verbal expression of these themes, however, would be in
stantly rejected as absurd and offensive. The solution:

The MARLBORO TATTOO AD: With its virile men (cow
boys, racing car drivers, sky divers, etc.) whose appearance alone


30

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

projected more of an image of raw virility than any number of
words could ever convev.

Using a C o m m on Resentment or Unvoiced Protest
to Capture a Far Greater Market Than the Direct
Statement of the Solution of That Resentment
Would Produce

Problem: To sell a do-it-yourself book on television repairs.
Although all owners of TV sets were the potential market, only
a small fraction considered themselves interested enough or ca
pable enough to respond to a direct promise headline: "Save up
to $100 a year on your TV repairs!" Most were afraid thev could
not make the repairs themselves. Therefore, the market must
be broadened to include the nonhandvmen owners, bv exploit
ing the existing resentment against TV s e n i ce contracts. The
solution:

WHY HAVEN'T TV OWNERS BEEN TOLD
THESE FACTS

Was your set purchased after the spring of 1947? Then
here is the full, uncensored storv of how- von can avoid
those $15-$20 repair bills--avoid those $30-860 a vear ser
vice fees--and still get the perfect, movie-clear pictures
you've dreamed about!

How many times this week have you had to get up to
fix a jumpy TV picture? . . . How many times have you had
to put up with ghosts? . . .

90% of These Breakdowns Are Unnecessary!
All these breakdowns mav have seemed tragic to vou

at the moment they happened--but here is the real trag
edy! Do you know that the same exact set that vou now
have in your front room . . . has been playing in manu
facturer's test rooms for months--and playing perfectly!

These sets have been subjected

to "Breakdown
Tests" . . . These sets have been tested against every con
ceivable type of viewing hazard . . . And, in almost every
one of these cases, these sets have produced perfect, movie-


YOUR PROSPECT S STATE OF AWARENESS

clear pictures, without major breakdowns, for as much as
one full vear! Here are some of the reasons why:

What TV Experts Have Learned About Your Set.
If your set were properly cared for, as these sets
were . .. it need break down only once during the entire
year . . .

If your set were properly cared for, it can actually give
you perfect, movie-clear reception the other 364 days of
the year . . .

And most important, these experts have discovered
that you do not have to be a handyman or a mechanic in
order to coax this performance . . . Here's why:
5 Minutes a Week for Perfect Reception.
These TV experts have discovered that your TV set is
a great deal like your bod}' in this respect--that it gives
warning signals before it has a major breakdown . . .

Now, if you had the knowledge to make a few minor
adjustments, on the outside controls of that set, then you
could correct those symptoms . . .

If you do not have this knowledge . . . then your set

will weaken, you will have a constantly bad picture . . .

It's as simple as that. You pay a repairman--not for
his work--but for his knowledge. If you had that knowl
edge yourself--then you would not have to pav him at
all . . .'

Now suppose that you had a TV expert at your elbow
24 hours a day. Suppose that every time your set began to
flicker, or jump . . . this expert would show you exactly what
knob on the outside of vour set vou could turn . . .

Suppose

that every

time you were annoyed bv
ghosts . . . this expert would show you a simple nonmechanical trick . . .

Yes, and suppose that even when your set went black,

this expert could show you . . .

All the Information You Need About Your TV Set!
This is exactly what a new book, the TELEVISION

OWNER'S GUIDE does for you . . .


32

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

Projecting an Ultimate Triumph That
the Prospect Will Identify With

Problem: To sell music lessons by correspondence to a greater
audience than would respond to a direct "Plav Real Tunes on the
Piano in Five Davs" approach. The solution:

THEY LAUGHED WHEN I
SAT DOWN AT THE PIANO.
BUT WHEN I STARTED TO PLAY!--

Arthur had just played "The Rosarv." The room rang
with applause. I decided that this would he a dramatic mo
ment for me to make my debut. To the amazement of all
my friends, I strode confidently over to the piano and sat
down.

"Jack is up to his old tricks," somebody chuckled. The

crowd laughed . . .

"Can he really play?" I heard a girl whisper to Arthur.
"Heavens, no!" Arthur exclaimed. "He never plaved a
note in his life. But you just watch him. This is going to
be good." . . .

Then I Started to Play.
Instantly a tense silence fell on the guests. The laugh
ter died on their lips as if by magic . .. I heard gasps of
amazement. My friends sat breathless--spellbound.

I played on and on and as I plaved I forgot the people
around me. I forgot the hour, the place, the breathless lis
teners. The little world I lived in seemed to fade--seemed
to grow dim--unreal. Only the music was real . .. It seemed
as if the master musician himself were speaking to me . . .
not in words but in chords. Not in sentences but in ex
quisite melodies!

A Complete Triumph!
As the last notes of the Moonlight Sonata died awav,
the room resounded with a sudden roar of applause. I found
myself surrounded by excited faces. How mv friends
carried on! Men shook me by the hand--wildly congratu
lated me--pounded me on the back with their enthusiasm!
Everybody was exclaiming with delight--plving me with


YOUR P R O S P E C T 'S STATE OF AWARENESS

33

rapid questions . . . "Jack! Why didn't you tell us you could
play like that?" . . . "Where did you learn?" . . . "How long
have you studied?" . . . "Who was your teacher?"

"I have never even seen my teacher," I replied. "And

just a short while ago I couldn't even play a note."

"Quit vour kidding," laughed Arthur, himself an accom
plished pianist. "You've been studying for years. I can tell."
"I have been studying only a short while," I insisted.
"I decided to keep it a secret 'so I could surprise all you

folks."

Then I told them the whole story
"Have vou ever heard of the U.S. School of Music?"

T

' I S K PQ

A few of my friends nodded. "That's a correspondence

school, isn't it'3" thev exclaimed.

"Exactly," I replied. "They have a new simplified
method that can teach you to play any instrument by mail
in just a few short months." . . .

Projecting the Result of a Problem in Such a Way That It
Will Be Identified With by People Who Would Reject a
Direct Statement of the Problem Itself

Problem: To increase the sales of a mouthwash, not only on
a germ theme (which could be immediately accepted), but on
the more universal social-offense theme, which would be rejected
in its direct form. The idea of bad breath was too insulting to be
taken by the public "straight." The solution:

OFTEN A BRIDESMAID BUT NEVER A BRIDE

Edna's case was really a pathetic one. Like every
woman, her primary ambition was to marry. Most of the
girls in her set were married--or about to be. Yet no one
possessed more charm or grace or loveliness than she.

And as her birthdays crept gradually toward that tragic
thirtv-mark, marriage seemed farther from her life than
ever.

She was often a bridesmaid but never a bride.


34

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

YOUR PROS

That's the insidious thing about halitosis (unpleasant
breath). You, yourself rarely know when vou have it. And
even your closest friends won't tell vou.

Sometimes, of course, halitosis comes from some deepseated organic disorder that requires professional advice.
But usually--and fortunately--halitosis is onlv a local con
dition that yields to the regular use of Listerine as a mouth
wash and gargle. It is an interesting thing that this wellknown antiseptic that has been in use for \ ears for surgi
cal dressings, possesses these unusual properties as a breath
deodorant...

Projecting the Result of an Accomplishment to Attract
People Who Would Be Frightened Away by the Work

Implied to Achieve It

Problem: To broaden the market for home correspondence
courses, beyond that possible with a direct statement of the im
mediate result--learning or skill. An attempt must be made to
direct the prospect's mind away from effort, to reward. The so
lution:

"HERE'S AN EXTRA $50, GRACE--"
'7'm making real money now!"
"Yes, I've been keeping it a secret until pav day came.
I've been promoted with an increase of $50 a month. And
the first extra money is yours. Just a little reward for urg
ing me to study at home. The boss saws mv spare time
training has made me a valuable man to the firm and there's
more money coming soon. We're starting up easv street,
Grace, thanks to vou and the I.C.S. . . ."

The List Never Ends

Every day new solutions, new patterns are being created.
Wherever the direct appeal fails, or loses its power, you should
begin to explore a fifth stage headline.

However, there are two vital points to remember in con
nection with this problem. First of all, this type of headline is in-


YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

35

finitely more difficult to bring home to the target than any of the
other four types. You are far more like