 excitement, drama, quality or helievahilitij to your prospect, then those elements should he expressed
either in the product itself, or in its package, or in its ad.

The same hypothesis holds true for the components that make
up your product. If vour product has electronic components, for
example, it should have an electronic flavor to both its appear
ance and its advertising. Shoiv the radar installations, guided mis-


1 28

SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: IDENTIFICATION

siles, jet aircraft that use the same parts. Life for the average man
is dull, completely lacking in adventure. Offer to let him partici
pate in the frontier explorations of our world, and vou have welded
a tremendously potent appeal onto your product'


9

THE THIRD TECHNIQUE
OF BREAKTHROUGH
COPY: GRADUALEATION

How to Make Your Prospect Believe
Your Claims Before You State Them

As we have learned before, for the
purpose of persuasion, the human mind may be divided into three
dimensions--three great rivers of emotional force that determine
the reaction to your ad, and therefore its success or failure.

The first of these dimensions is Desire--want, yearning, mo
tivation--with specific goals and/or cures in mind--with the
prospect begging to be shown how to obtain them. It is the copy
writer's job to make sure the path to these goals goes through
the product--and to make sure that the prospect can visualize
every drop of satisfaction that their achievement will give him.
The second dimension is Identification--the need for ex
pression and recognition--unformulated, unspoken, at least par
and
tially unconscious--searching
embodiments. It is the copv writer's job to crystallize these self-

symbols, definitions

for


1 30

T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

definitions and emboch' them in his product--so that the product
may be used, not only as a source of physical satisfaction, but also
as a symbolic extension of the personality of the prospect for whom
it is intended.

Until now, this book has been concerned with these first two
dimensions. They have determined the selection of our headline.
and our illustration, and most of the content of our ad.

But--important as they are--desire and identification alone
are never enough. By themselves, they can never produce the full
reaction the copy writer must have if he is to achieve the maxi
mum success with his product. No matter how intense the desire.
no matter how demanding the need to identify, both these reac
tions must be fused with a third great emotional force--Belief--
before they can produce the final overwhelming determinant of
action--Absolute Conviction.

It is this fusion of desire and belief--this conviction--this
certainty--this feeling in the prospect of being right in his choice--
of being assured of what he has been promised--that the cop,/
writer seeks as his ultimate goal.

And it is to this third dimension of the human mind--the

Belief that produces this certainty--that we now turn.

What Exactly Is Belief?

It is perhaps the most complex fusion of thought and emo
tion in the human mind. It is, first of all, your prospects mental
picture of the world he lives in--what facts make it up, how it
works, in what direction its truths and values lie.

But these accepted facts, truths, values and opinions are
only the raw material of belief. Even more important is the vast
amount of emotional security he derives from these beliefs. It is
the wonderful feeling of comfort and reassurance of living in a
world that has meaning, where there are answers to be had.
where somehow the facts all fit. A world that he can understand
and depend on, that he can predict, that will stav together and


T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

1 31

not blow up in his face tomorrow morning or the morning after
that.

Do not be misled for even a moment. The need to believe--
and the need for secure beliefs--is just as powerful an emotional
force as the strongest desire for physical satisfaction, or the most
urgent search for expression.

Most adults have done their basic learning of these beliefs
when they were children. At that time, and in that dependent
stage of their lives, they laid down the primary channels of be
lief that their minds would follow for the rest of their days. They
were forced to do this, in order to understand the world, to gain
its approval, to trust and master it, and to develop themselves
into self-sustaining adults.

To ask them to shatter even one of these alreadv-established
lines of belief--to plunge into uncertainty again--to be forced to
reassemble their beliefs in new, untested ways--is to ask them
to become children again. And--unless they are "frightened be
yond belief," unless their entire conceptual world has crumbled
around them--thev simply will not do it.

The basic rule of belief, then, can simply be stated as this:
If vou violate vour prospect's established beliefs in the slight
est degree--either in content or direction--then nothing you
promise him, no matter how appealing, can save your ad.
But, on the other hand, and even more important:
If you can channel the tremendous force of his belief--either
in content or direction--behind only one claim, no matter how
small, then that one fully-believed claim will sell more goods than
all the half-questioned promises vour competitors can write for
all the rest of their days. This channeling of belief is so power
ful that, if properlv directed, it will even support othenvise-absurd
claims.

It is simply a question of whether you are going to paddle
upstream or down. Whether vou are going to work against the
tide of established belief, or with it.

As far as advertising is concerned, then, belief is immutable.


1 32

T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

It cannot be changed. It must be complied with at everv step.
Every one of the statements you make in vour ad must fit in
with your prospects version of "the facts" at that precise mo
ment. It is not the function of your ad to change those facts.

But it is its function--and one of its great sources of strength--
to extend them. To build a bridge of belief between those facts as
they exist in your prospect's mind today--and the ultimate facts
your prospect must believe if he is to accept your claims.

This process of starting with the facts that vour prospect is
already willing to accept, and leading him logically and comfort
ably through a gradual succession of more and more remote
facts--each of which he has been prepared in turn to accept--
is called Gradualization. It is the third Process of Persuasion.

Mind you, this process of Gradualization has nothing to do
with the offering of proof, or reason-why explanations, or testi
monials or documentation. Each of these mechanisms of belief
adds to the power of your ad, and we will explore each of them
in turn in the chapters that follow.

In Chapter 11, we will discuss the verbal demonstration that

your product does what you claim--Mechanization.

In Chapter 12, we will discuss the destruction of alternate

ways of satisfying that same desire--Concentration.

In Chapter 14, we will discuss the offering of authorities and
proof, the reassurance that your prospect has made a wise c h o i c eVerification.

All these devices build belief. But by far the most funda
mental of all--though the most inconspicuous--is Gradualization.
For Gradualization determines--not the content of your ad--but
its structure, its architecture, the way i/ou build it.'

We have already seen that it is the'dominating desire of your
prospect that determines the content of vour ad. It is his long
ings for identification and self-expression that, in most cases, de
termine your illustrations.

But it is the facts that he believes in and accepts, and the
way that he passes that acceptance along from one fact to


T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

1 33

another, that determines that ad's development--the arrangement
of your claims and your images and vour proofs, so that there is
a step-bv-step strengthening--not only of your prospect's desire--
but of his conviction that the satisfaction of that desire will come
true through your product.

The Architecture of Belief

In essence, then, the theory of Gradualization is based upon

this fact:

That every claim, everv image, every proof in your ad has

two separate sources of strength--

1. The content of that statement itself; and
2. The preparation vou have made for that statement--either
by recognizing that preparation as already existing in your prospect's
mind, or bv deliberately laving the groundwork for that statement
in the preceding portion of the ad itself.

And, because of this fact, we can strengthen the power of

each of these statements in two separate ways--

1. Bv increasing the intensity of its content--by making
greater promises, bv portraying more dramatic images, by offer
ing more compelling proof; and/or

2. Bv changing the place or position or sequence in which
that statement occurs in the ad--by strengthening the ground
work for belief in that statement by the material which precedes
it--and therefore increasing the intensity of belief given to it--
the immediate acceptance of its content, without question, when
the prospect encounters it in vour ad.

Make no mistake, it is this acceptance that we are looking
for. Effective advertising, like effective literature, is built--not of
words--but of reactions. We put down on paper an architecture
of words. If these words are effective, they evoke, in turn, an ar
chitecture of reactions in our prospect's mind. We are creating a
stream of acceptances, with a definite sequence and content and
direction, and, if we are successful, with a definite goal--the


1 34

T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CRADUALIZATION

absolute conviction in your prospects mind that he must have
your product.

This is the essence of building your ad. We now turn to the

techniques of its accomplishment.

A New Definition of Awareness

We now know that Gradualization is the art of starting your
ad with a statement that will be immediately and entirely ac
cepted, and then building a chain of subsequent acceptances upon
this first statement. The purpose of this chain of acceptances is
to lead your reader to a goal conclusion, which he will then ac
cept, but which he would not as readily or as thoroughly have
accepted without the preliminary statements.

This quest for acceptance begins, of course, with vour head
line. This all-important first statement that you make--this meet
ing place between your story and your prospect--must not only
be capable of awakening interest and desire, but of being ac
cepted at the very first glance as being true.

Interest and believability--these are the two requirements
that determine your headline. We have already discussed these
requirements in Chapter 2, on the State of Awareness of our
market.

We can now redefine this State of Awareness as readiness to
accept. And we can now say--especially in the Fifth Stage of
Awareness--that the effectiveness of your headline is as much de
termined by the willingness of your audience to believe what it
says, as it is by the promises it makes.

This is the reason that you cannot always use the most pow
erful claim in your headline. Or even the very problem that your
product solves. Because without supporting evidence already ex
isting in the mind of your prospect to prepare him for that head
line claim, he just won't believe it. Either he'll believe that it's
exaggerated or false, or he just won't believe it applies to him.


T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

1 35

In either case, too many of your prospects turn away without
reading on, and your ad fails.

This fact--that your most powerful claim does not always
make vour most powerful headline--is a paradox that many copy
writers still cannot accept. Mail order advertisers, however, have
a simple wav of proving it. When a power-claim headline doesn't
work--for reasons either of Awareness or Sophistication--they
immediatelv split it against a second head, with far fewer claims
in it, but far more likely to be believed. Then they build a beliefbridge from this second headline, to the same exact claims they
had featured in the first, but now anticipated by careful prepa
ration every step along the way.

A Detailed Example

Let us take such an ad--that we have already glanced at in
Chapter 2--and break down its structure step by step. What we
are looking for here is not content, nor promises, nor claims; but
the way these promises and claims arc arranged in the ad, to
help each one of them gain full acceptance when it is encoun
tered in turn by the prospect.

This ad was written in 1951. Its purpose was to sell a Tele
vision Repair Manual. Theoretically, every TV owner who was
having anv trouble with his set (and almost all of them were at
that time) was a prospect. But, before the prospect could be
turned into a customer, he had to believe two things:

1. That he could save money by making his own TV repairs;

and

2. That he was capable of making them.
Both these statements were matters of fact. The average TV
owner certainlv could save money if he had made his own re
pairs; and about 80% of those repairs were simple enough for
him to make himself.

But the overwhelming majority of prospects simply didn't


1 36

T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

realize these facts. Most of them thought of themselves as nonhandymen, even in relation to far simpler devices than a televi
sion set. And, in 1951, the TV set was considered a complicated
mechanical monster, far beyond their poor powers to understand
let alone correct.

These two factors blocked the use of the obvious powerclaim headline for this product. Such a headline was written and
tested--"Save up to $100 a Year on Your TV Repairs!"--but it
failed to make a profit. The obvious was unsuccessful. Power
alone could not move the product.

Two tasks faced the copy writer in revising this ad. First, he
had to reach all his prospects in this market, and not just those
among them who considered themselves handymen. And second,
he had to convince all these non-handymen prospects that their
sets weren't really such fragile, complicated monsters after all,
and that they themselves could easily correct most troubles that
arose.

Once these two statements were believed by the prospect
and only then--could the previous headline claim of "Save up to
$100 a year on your TV repairs" be brought in at full power. Let
us see, acceptance by acceptance, how this new ad built to that
point:

The headline, first of all, would have to be a general state
ment, crystallizing and exploiting the universal resentment against
the high TV repair bills, the $60-a-vear TV service contracts that
were then in existence, and the outright thievery that occurred
in only a small fraction of the TV repair shops, but that had stig
matized the entire industry. From there--from this universallyaccepted resentment--the ad could then build toward the two
goal conclusions listed above. Let us see how this was done, state
ment by statement.

Here is the new headline:

"WHY HAVEN'T TV OWNERS BEEN TOLD
THESE FACTS?"


T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

1 37

No claim. No promise--except that of disclosure. But here
is an implication of foul plav, which echoed the existing suspi
cion in the TV owner himself. Here is a crystallization and out
right expression that the average owner felt toward being taken.
Facts have been withheld. This is something he can agree with!
Thus, having achieved its first acceptance by its suspicionheadline, the ad reinforces that effect by an inclusion-question.
It asks a questions which, in form, seems to limit the market; but
which, in content, actually assures the correct answer by the over
whelming majority of it:

"Was i/our set purchased after the spring of 1947?"

95% of television owners would answer Yes. Thus the ad has
built two acceptances in its first two sentences. It has started a
Habit of Agreement in its reader. It now exploits that agreement
by making its first definite promise in the third sentence:

"Then here is the full, uncensored stonj of how yon
can avoid those $15-$20 repair bills--avoid those $30-$60
a year service fees--and still get the perfect, movie-clear
pictures you've dreamed about!"

H ow Belief Was Built Into the Opening

This is the ad's first claim. Its content alone is extremelv
powerful. But that powerful content--which otherwise might drive
many readers awav as being just too fantastic to be believed--
has been given extra belief--has been loaned, as it were, extra
belief--not only by the first two sentences that preceded it--but
by these deliberate constructions in the statement itself:

1. By the grammatical construction, "Was your. . ." in the
second sentence, and "Then . . ." in the third which by its very
form generates belief. It does this by implying exclusion. It says
that the promise will come true only in certain cases; that it will
only work for television sets purchased after 1947; that the ad
cannot make this promise for sets purchased earlier. Thus it adds


138

T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

credence to whatever statement follows it. Yon can feel this added
believability yourself by taking out the lead-word "Then" from
the sentence and reading it again. Immediately, it loses half its
force--force added to the content of the statement by the
grammatical-bridge tying it in to the first two acceptances.

2. The second attempt at adding believabilitv is bv the de
scriptive nature of the promise. It is not onlv a promise of re
ward (the money saved), but a catalog of almost-universal symp
toms (repair bills and service fees). Since the overwhelming
majority of set owners are suffering from these problems, their
descriptions evoke two more "Yes--I have them" reactions from
the reader, and carry these reactions over to the save-monev
claims that immediately follow them. If these descriptions were
eliminated, the money-saving claims would be much weaker:
"Then here is the full, uncensored story of liow you can save
$15-$20--save $30-$60--save $90-$ 100 on your' TY set--and
still get the perfect, movie-clear pictures you've dreamed about!"

3. And finally, even though the causes of the set owner's
problems are specifically described, the cures for them are de
liberately left ambiguous. The fact that thev will save otherwise
wasted money, that they will get improved reception, is included--
how they will do this is not. The mechanism bv which these goals
will be accomplished is left out. It is left out because the reader
has not yet been prepared for it. If he were to learn, at this mo
ment in the ad, that he had to make repairs on his set to save
this money, the average reader would turn the page. So he is
given specific symptoms, that he will agree he has, and specific
savings by eliminating them, that are certainly logical to expect.
He may or may not accept all these three claims in the sentence
completely; but the strength of their promise, the two or three
or four acceptances that he has already given, and the implied
disclosures still remaining in the body of the ad, should be enough
to carry him on, to this next paragraph:

"How many times this week have you had to get up to fix


T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

1 39

a jumpy TV picture? . . . How many times have you had to put
up with ghosts? . . . How many times. . . ."

Here again is reinforcement of belief--the description of
universal symptoms--the coaxing out of a stream of agreements.
"Yes . . . Yes . . . Yes"--he must answer if he has had trouble with
his set. A habit of acceptance is being built inside him. Trust is
being formed, layer by laver--as each question poses a test, and
each ves answer proves to the reader that the ad is talking about
him.

Already the ad is beginning to weave its pattern of promise
and belief and then promise again. Now, with as many as seven
or eight agreements behind it to establish a firm foundation of
belief, the ad moves on to its next great promise:

"90% Of These Breakdowns Are Unnecessary!"
"All of these breakdowns may have seemed tragic to
you at the moment they happened--but here is the real
tragedy! Do you know that the same exact set that you now
have in your front room . . . has been playing in manu
facturer's test rooms for months--and playing perfectly!"

Goal Conclusions

The ad is now laving the1 basis for the first of its two goal
conclusions--that TV sets are not fragile--that they have amaz
ing endurance if they are properlv cared for. Only when the
reader accepts this fact, can the ad go on to its second conclu
sion--that whatever minor breakdowns do occur can be easily
handled bv the owner himself.

But the ad is still five paragraphs awav from any mention of
the owner touching his set. First it must establish the depend
ability of the set; and it does this bv two methods. At the start,
in the following two paragraphs, it gives graphic descriptions of
the manufacturer's own tests used to establish this dependability:

"These sets have been subjected to 'Breakdown Tests'
that would seem incredible to the average owner. They have


140

THIRD TECHNIQUE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

been tamed on for 24 hours a day--7 days a week
4
iceeks a month. Some of these sets have been naming with
out a moment's pause for as much as 17 months.

"These sets have been tested against almost every con
ceivable type of viewing hazard. . . up to 120 miles away
from the station . . . against the interference of an entire
warehouse of electrical appliances . . . in special, steel-ribbed
buildings, which ordinarily would produce several distinct
ghosts.

"And in almost every one of these cases, these sets
have produced perfect, movie-clear pictures--without major
breakdowns--for as much as one full year! Here are some
of the reasons why:"

Then, when the reader has fully visualized the impact of

these test reports, the ad now turns to expert authority and log
ical construction to reinforce this belief. Notice in the next fewparagraphs how the ad picks up the already-accepted condition.
"If your set were properly cared for, as these sets were . . .", and
uses that now-established condition to prove the series of state
ments that follow it:

"What TV Experts Have Learned About Your Set!"
"If your set were properly cared for--as

these sets
were cared for in these tests--it need break down only once
during the entire year! In other words, you may actually
have to call in a repairman only once during the entire
year You can save the $30-$60 'service fees you are nowpaying--and you can save most of the SI OS 15 repair bills."
"If your set was properly cared for. if can actually give
you perfect, movie-clear reception the other 364 days a year.
It can give you this perfect reception without special 'elec
tronic equipment--without the help of a repairman--up to
100 miles away from your station."

Notice that in these two paragraphs, the ad returns to the
claims made in the third sentence--repeats them almost word for
word--and then gives logical proof, in logical form, for each of
them. As we have pointed out before, these claims--"you can avoid
those $30-$60 a year service
those $15-420

repair bills--avoid


T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

141

the perfect, movie-clear picture

fees--and still get
ijou've dreamed
about!"--were stated in the third sentence without supporting proof
at that time; but with strong implication--"Here is the full, uncensored. story . . ."--that such proof would follow.

That proof is now submitted, in an extremely formal and log
ical structure. Thus the ad again weaves proof into promise--re
peating previous claims in a new context of full documentation,
where it could only suggest that they would be proven before.

Notice also that this logical proof--"If your set were cared
for. . . it need break down only once a year. . . you need call a
repairman only once a year. . . you save the service fees and most
repair bills."--is, in itself, solidly grounded in the test-proof pre
it--"being subjected to Break
sented in the paragraphs before
type of viewing hazard . . .
down
and produced perfect pictures, without breakdowns,
for as much
as one full year" Thus a chain of proof upon proof is constructed--
each new statement repeating the heart of the proof before it.

tests . . . against almost every

Thus the ad has now proved--bv using the Mechanism of In
tensification--by repeating the same theme-content seven differ
ent times in seven different wavs--that vour TV set is dependable.

The Ultimate Objective

This was the first goal-conclusion. At this point the reader
is convinced that it is true. The ad is now ready to go on to prove
the second goal conclusion:
that the owner can correct minor
breakdowns himself.

It begins this proof in the verv next paragraph, in this way:

"And, most important, these experts have discovered
that you do not have to he a handyman or a mechanic in
order to coax this performance out of your set! Here's why"

Notice that it is in this paragraph that the entirely-new (to
the reader) assumption--that vou can fix your own minor break
downs--is first introduced. Yet its novelty is deliberately con-


1 42

T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

cealed; it is presented as though it were simply another rephrasing
of the bv-now already accepted dependability conclusion. There
is therefore no break in the logical flow of proof. Acceptance is
built into this entirely new statement in these four different ways:
1. By paragraph parallelism. By framing the statement as the
last of a series of similar paragraphs--all the others of which have
already been accepted--instead of physically setting it off as a
new point with its own sub head and a different construction, as
the reader would ordinarily expect.

2. By the lead word, "And," a tie-in phrase, which indicates
that the sentence accompanying it is the same as those that have
gone before.

3. By immediately following "And" by a second tie-in phrase,
"most important," which again implies that the remainder of the
statement is part of the series that has gone before.

4. And finally, by repeating the phrase, "these experts have
discovered," which echoes the identifying subhead at the begin
ning of the series, and carries on the acceptance-momentum of
the series as a whole.

All these deliberate constructions combine to give this short,
but vital, transitional paragraph the acceptance, and therefore the
believability, of all the careful planning that has gone before it.
They allow the reader to make what otherwise might be a jar
ring transition from already-established proof to an entirely new
promise with a minimum of effort.

Now the ad builds its final step--showing that the only re
pairs that the average owner will have to make are actually minor
external adjustments on his set. Notice how it integrates this newextension of its previous thought into what has gone before bv
starting with the phrase, once again, "These experts have dis
covered . . ."

Here are the next three paragraphs:

"Five Minutes a Week for Perfect Reception."
"These T\r experts have discovered that ipur 7T set
is a great deal like your body in this respect--that it gives


T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CRADLALIZATION

1 43

you learning signals before it has a major breakdown. For
instance, after your set was installed, it probably played per
fectly for the first week. But then it began to suffer from the
vibration, the jarring, the interference of other electrical ap
pliances in your home. The picture might suddenly begin to
flop over or flicker--lines may appear on your screen.

"Now--and this is important--if you had the knowledge
to quickly make a few minor adjustments, on the outside
controls of your set, then you could correct those symp
toms, you could keep that set playing peifectly, and you
could prevent major breakdowns in exactly the same way
they were prevented in these manufacturers' tests.

"If you do not have this knowledge . . . if you do not
make these adjustments, then your set trill weaken, you will
get a consistently bad picture, and you will have to call a
repairman."

The second goal-conclusion of the ad has now been reached.

At this stage of the copy, the reader now knows:

f. That his set is dependable enough to ayoid major break
downs during by far the greatest majority of the time he will playit; and

2. That if he obtains the proper knowledge, he can correct
minor breakdowns himself, and help prevent the gradual forma
tion of major breakdowns, by making a few simple adjustments
to the outside controls of his set.

Therefore, the stage has now- been set for the final conclu
sion--the pay-off conclusion--a conclusion with all the inevitable
logical force of a syllogism--that:
3. The owner should obtain

these
minor adjustments himself--and therefore save the money he is
paying today for sen-ice contracts, and save by far the greatest
majority of the money he is paying for repair bills.

this knowledge--make

Here is how this final conclusion is phrased by the copy:

"It's as simple as that. You pay a repairman--not for
his work--but for his knowledge. If you had that knowl
edge yourself--then you would not have to pay him at all."


144

T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CRADLE

A Restatement of Our Basic Theory

We have taken a great deal of space to analyze, in exact de
tail, one ad, and the structure of believabilitv that underlies the
effectiveness of its claims.

We have done this for two reasons:
1. To show how the goal-conclusion--the introduction of the
product claim itself--may be made far more effective if it is de
layed till the prospect has been prepared to accept it. And

2. To show how this full acceptance--this willingness to be
lieve without question-can gradually be built up, layer by laver
agreement by agreement, by use of the proper structure.'

'

Let us now state formally some of the rules we have dis
covered in this analysis, and some of the devices vou can use
time after time, to create the maximum structural believabiliti,
tor each of your advertisements.

Here are the basic principles:
Gradualization is the art of stating a claim in such a wav

that it will receive the greatest possible acceptance and/or be
lievabilitv from your prospect.

Belief ultimately depends upon structure. Just as desire de
pends upon promise, so belief in that promise depends upon the
amount of preparation that promise has been given before vour
reader is asked to accept it.

One fully-believed promise has ten times the sales power of
ten partially-believed promises. Most copy writers try to strengthen
ads by piling promise upon promise. What thev usually get for
their troubles is greater sales resistance from their prospects and
trouble from the E T C. They could far better invest the same
time in strengthening the believabilitu-structure of the original
justifiable promise.

Now, how do you strengthen this believability-structure*
What are the devices you can choose from to add believabilitv
to any promise, in any ad?


T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

145

Here are at least a few of them. Once vou get the feel of
using them, you'll probably develop a whole armorv of vour own.

1. The Inclusion Question

Designed to permit immediate identification with vour storv.
To show the prospect that you're talking about him--not about
someone else who would answer No to the question. Therefore,
once he's identified with the questions--once he's made his first
agreements with you and placed himself in the Yes-answer group--
then your recommendations will have special meaning for him.

This is perhaps the most direct wav of building agreement
at the beginning of the ad. It's used everv day. For example, in
this advertisement--highly successful--for a book called The Art
of Selfishness:

ASK YOURSELF THESE NINE QUESTIONS

1. Do you find it increasinglv difficult to cope with

the world around you. . . .

2. Is your business or career a source of annoyance

and frustration. . . .

3. Are you tormented by inadequacies, fear and em

barrassments in your sex life. . . .

And so on.

2. Detailed Identification

Another device used at the beginning of the ad, to establish
immediate, and deep, agreement between the reader and the
copy. Here, instead of asking questions to set up your Yes-train,
you detail symptoms or problems that are your prospect's reasons
for desiring your product. Thus, again, your reader knows that
vou are talking about him--that vou "have been there vourself"--
and therefore that your recommendations will help answer these
problems, his problems, that you have catalogued so well.


1 46

T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OE B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: CRADUALIZATIOX

For example, in this ad for a course to improve the prospect's

child's grades in school:

Let me explain. I don't care whether your child is six
years old or twenty--boy or girl--in grade school high
school or college. It makes no difference how badly that
child is doing in school today--how difficult it is for him
to concentrate . . . how poor his memory mav be . . . howmuch a prisoner he is of crippling mental habits . . . how
terrified he mav be of mathematics, or grammar, or social
studi es, or even the hardest science course.

Of course, here--as in the Inclusion-Question--vour copv
must be accurate. You must know enough about the reader's
problems to make every word you write ring true. If vou don't,
you'll shatter your believability-net, and he'll simply' turn the
page.

So--before you write--research. Learn to know vour cus
tomer. This is alwavs the essential first step, in anv kind of copv

3. Contradiction of Present (False) Beliefs

Again, used at the beginning of the ad. And again used to
prepare a foundation for strong claim-statements that the reader
might never accept raw. Here, you come bluntly out and say, "I
know you think this is true; but I'm going to show YOU it's false."

Best used, of course, in conjunction with strong authority
strong
enough to contradict present (unpleasant) beliefs, and get away
with it.

For example, in an ad for cosmetics invented by a famous

plastic surgeon:

From this moment on, forget everything you have ever
heard or read about what age "must do" to your appear
ance. Forget anything you have ever believed about how
"old" you must look at thirty . . . forty . . . fifty . .. or even
sixty. . ..


T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

1 47

Here vou are not looking for agreement as much as you are
for a loosening of previous beliefs. You are saying that the old
limitations are passing, and your next paragraph should be your
first introduction of your positive claims, in somewhat the same
way that this ad goes on:

Because--starting with this moment--you are about
to enter into a new world of beautv! A world where ordi
nary fruits are transformed into anti-wrinkle cosmetics.
Where a. . . .

And so on.

4. The Language of Logic

So far, the devices we have discussed have been used to
build belief at the beginning of vour ad--to serve in the crucial
transition from vour headline to the stream of intensified prom
ises that vou are going to use to close the sale.

We have discussed the process of intensifying desire

in

Chapter 7. We now turn to the simultaneous, and equally im
portant, task of maintaining belief in each new statement as you
present it.

Here again, your objective is to build belief at the same exact
interlace each new
follows
it
there

time that vou build desire. To do this, you
promise
that
language-signals
from everything
fore can be believed without hesitation.

that show
that has been proved before. And that

logically
it

tcith

What are these language-signals? They are, of course, the
vocabulary of logic. They are the words we use when we reason:
when we argue; when we prove our point in anv discussion, and
force others to agree with us that we are right.

They are among the most powerful words in the English lan
guage--for the verv simple reason that they give the flavor of
conviction to the promises into which we weave them.

These words have been used for centuries in court, in politics,


148

T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

in science--even in that most-loved form of American fiction,
detective stories--to show others that proof has been offered.
that reason has been used, that one statement logically and in
evitably follows from another.

Therefore, after centuries of conditioning, the words them
selves--regardless of the content of the statements to which thev
are attached--now carry conviction. Therefore, thev should be
woven throughout your ad, wherever thev logically apply.

For example, let's look at some individual lines, in a num
ber of different ads. Let's see how each of these words (which
I'll italicize) gives a tone of reason and logic to those sentences
in which they're incorporated.

For example, in the famous Sherwin Codv ad:

Why do so many find themselves at a loss for words
to express their meaning adequately0 The reason for this
deficiency is clear. . . . Most persons do not write or speak
good English simply because thev have never formed the
habit of doing so. . . .

Or, in this ad for a book on how to manage difficult people:

Take, as an example, the man who hahitualhj refuses
to follow your instructions. There is a basic, underlying rea
son for this. Mr. Given shows you how to find that reason
and then explains the means of correcting it. The whole
solution can be surprisingly easy once you hate realized the
underlying causes. . . .

Or, for a book on learning how to learn:

. . . but simply by putting your LOCKED-UP LEARN
ING POWERS to work--today--as easily and logically as
'
this. . ..

"

'

And so on. There are dozens of such phrases for vou to use.

Among them are:

"This has been proved In/ thousands. . . ."
impossible? Not at all.
"Sound
simple. . . ."

It's actually as


T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

1 49

"Here's whtj. . . ."
"And, most important of all. is the fact that. . . ."
"Therefore . . ."
"This was, without a doubt, the most thorough. . . ."
"Thev discovered--in case after case--that. . . ."

This, again, is the language of logic. It is a language equally
as filled with emotion as the language of desire. Interwoven into
your promises, so subtly that the reader never even notices that
it is there, it gives vour claims the invaluable air of conviction.

5. Svllogistic Thinking

Now we go from the language of logic to the mechanisms
of logic. This is the role that reason plays in your ad. This is the
moment when you prove that your product works, through the
mechanism of logical reasoning.

For example, in one of the most successful automotive ac
cessory ads of all time, the copywriter wanted to prove that his
spark plug was superior to the ordinary plug--even though it
costs twice as much. Since the point of difference was simply
that his plug delivered a larger spark, the copywriter built up his
case in this way:

Your car runs because gasoline is fed into the cylin
ders where a spark causes it to fire. This action causes the
gas to explode . . . this explosion pushes down the piston.
Now here is the important thing to you. The larger the
spark is, the more powerful the explosion. The more pow
erful the explosion, the more power you get from your
gasoline.

Poor explosion means wasted gas--loss of power, poor

getaway, bad starting, a sluggish car.

Good explosion means more miles per gallon--more

horsepower; a more exciting car to drive!

Notice the power of these three simple paragraphs. Power
derived as much from their underlying formal structure as from


1 50

T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CRADUALIZATION

their claims. One statement inevitably leads into another. Evenword is logical. There is a constant process of equation: spark to
power, power to performance. Size equals power--and his plug
delivers the largest size.

Such structure--and the copv based on such a structure--
develops the feeling of inevitability. The reader feels that the
product must work. He has not onlv been told it works; he has
been shown proof that it works.

Such structure--though hidden behind the words it clothes
itself in--is actually a physical entity. You can seek it out of hun
dreds of ads, if you look beneath the words themselves. You can
trace it, codify it, and then repeat it. Once learned, it becomes
a powerful tool in selling hundreds of products.

We will explore these structures in more depth in the next

two chapters--on Redefinition and Mechanization.

6. Other Belief Forms

Once you grasp the fundamental idea that form--structure--
determines believabilitv, then all sorts of opportunities open up
to you. You realize that simply by the arrangement of i/our claims,
you can add to their believabilitv.

For example:
Contingency Structures--such as "If. . . then . . .", or "Wis

y o u r . . . t h e n . . . ."

Repetition of Proof: Echoing--such as "These experts

found. . . . These experts found. . . . These experts found. . . ."

Promise--Belief--Promise Variation. Where every sentence
of promise is followed (ideally) with another of proof, or verifi
cation, or documentation. So that the reader never has the breath
ing space to question.

Paragraph Parallelism. Where the same word structure used
in an accepted statement is then picked up exactly, and used to
borrow acceptance for a fresh claim.


T H I RD T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATIOX

1 51

There are manv more, of course. Some are words, some are
chains of reasoning, some are merelv the physical arrangement
of the copy on the page.

All have the same objective. To gain continued acceptance.

To prevent rejection. To build conviction. Belief is the goal.

Now let us look at some other methods of reinforcing it.


10
THE FOURTH TECHNIQUE
OF BREAKTHROUGH
COPY: REDEFINITION

How to Remove Objections to Your Product

Time and time again, you are
going to have to sell a product that has built-in handicaps. That--
along with its promises and its functions--also has certain aspects
to it that actually repel the prospect.

No product, of course, is perfect. If only for the reason that
he must pav money for what you have to sell, your prospect starts
with a basic minimum of resistance against buying your product.
But this resistance is intensified by certain drawbacks in some
products, often to the point where--unless you take definite ac
tion in your ad to redefine them--these drawbacks will actually
kill your sale.

Let us now look at the three general categories of drawback,
and then at the three types of redefinition that eliminates them.
First, of course, there is the product that is (or that sounds)

too complicated--too hard to use.
153


1 54

F O U R TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I ON

Second, there is the product that is not important enough--
whose basic appeal doesn't have a statistically broad enough
market.

And third, there is the product that just costs too much. Its
price is so much above the price of other products in its class
that people simply turn away when it's mentioned.

It's amazing how many products fall into one or all of these
categories. Fortunately, the same mechanism--redefinition--helps
you deal with all three.

Redefinition is the process of giving a new definition to your

product. It says that the product is this rather than that. Its ob
jective is to remove a roadblock to your sale--if possible, before
the prospect even knows it exists.

Perhaps the classic case of redefinition is that of Lifebuov
soap in the Thirties. Lifebuoy was a good soap that did a good
cleaning job. But it had one overwhelming drawback--a horrible
medicinal odor.

Since the odor couldn't be removed without removing the
clet amng power, the problem became one of redefinition. Put sim
ply: how do we change this odor from a liability into an asset?
The answer, of course, was the famous B.O. campaign. The
prospect's attention was focussed on the odor of his own bodv--
an odor which he was told would drive away people (and which
does).

He was then told this odor must be eradicated--not with an

ordinary soap, which was not powerful enough to do the job
but with a soap with the odor-destroying power to make a long
shoreman acceptable at a society ball. Lifebuov was this superpowerful soap. And the overwhelming proof--that von could smell
the moment you opened the wrapper--was the strong medicinal
odor built

into every cake.

This is the simplest, and often the most effective kind of re

definition. A simple concept-judo. A complete reversal. Turning
a liability into an asset, with a single idea.

Wherever you can use this flip-flop method, do so. But most


F O U R TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I ON

lOO

problems of redefinition are more complicated, and demand more
complicated means of dealing with them--using many of the de
vices we have just examined in the process of Gradualization.
Let us now turn to these devices, and see how they can pre
sent an entirelv different image of the product to the prospect
than vou would have imaginetl, had you not thought them through
beforehand.

1. Simplification

Our first category is the overcomplicated product--the prod
uct that sounds too hard. To see how to replace this image with
a more favorable one, let's look again at the Television Repair
Book ad that we discussed in the last chapter.

As vou remember, the original ad for this product failed be
cause it promised "Do your own TV repairs" in its headline. This
was considered too difficult by the average set owner (even though
the ad said "It's easy, its simple, it's quick" in the next paragraph).
Therefore--since the ad confronted the prospect with the fact
that he would have to make repairs before it made those repairs
easy and simple and quick--he simply- turned the page and tuned
the ad out.

The second ad did not discuss repairs. It discussed break
downs and expenses. And, as we have seen, it spent its first sev
eral paragraphs showing that these breakdowns and expenses did
not have to occur at all, if the sets were given the proper care.
talked about the prospect's
world--and compared it with a far more promising world where
expert care produces trouble-free TV viewing. Now the two worlds
must be joined

Up to this point,

the product.

the ad has

through

This joining is called by the pitchman, "the turn." It is a
transition of great delicacy. It must be accomplished without a
jar. In this ad, it begins in this paragraph:

And most important, these experts have discovered
that vou do not have to be a handyman or a mechanic in


156

F O U R TH T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I ON

order to coax this performance out of vour set! Here's
why. . ..

We have already seen how the repetition ( . . . these experts
have discovered . . . ) and the paragraph parallelism tie this state
ment into the stream of belief that has been built up before it.
Now, however, we are going to look at this same paragraph from
another point of view--to see how it provides the first step in
eliminating any fear of making your own repairs.

Notice, of course, that the very fear of the average owner.
that he is not a repairman, is here brought out in the o p e nspecifically stated--but now framed as a promise.

Notice too that there is no mention of the word, "repair," at
this point. It is still too early at this point. Though the average own
er might be willing to accept the idea that he could "coax" better
performance out of his set, it would still be too much to ask him
to believe that he could make repairs on that set at this point.

This leads to the final step. The ad must now redefine what
the reader thinks of when he hears
the word "repairs." It must
now lay a new foundation of feet--showing that almost all the
repairs the owner will have to make are actually only minor ex
ternal adjustments.

It now proceeds to do this, in the following three paragraphs
which we have already studied in the last chapter, and which we
will now look at again to see the second process of p e r s u a s i o nredefinition--which is also occurring in them.

Here are the paragraphs again:

Five Minutes a Week for Perfect Reception.
These TV experts have discovered that vour TV set is
a great deal like vour body in this respect--that it gives you
warning signals before it has a major breakdown.' For'in
stance, after your set was installed, 'it probably plaved per
fectly for the first week. But then it began to suffer from the
vibration, the jarring, the interference of other electrical ap
pliances in your home. The picture might suddenly begin to
flop over or flicker--lines may appear on vour screen.


F O U R TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I ON

1 57

Now--and this is important--if you had the knowl
edge to quickly make a few minor adjustments, on the out
side controls of vour set. then vou could correct those symp
toms. you could keep that set playing perfectly, and you
could prevent major breakdowns in exactly die same way
thev were prevented in these manufacturers' tests.

If you do not have this knowledge . .. if you do not
make these adjustments, then your set will weaken, you
will get a consistently bad picture, and you will have to call
a repairman.

Now, what occurs in these four paragraphs is actually a re
definition of the term, "repairs" in the reader's mind. This is done
in three separate, but integrated, wax's:

1. By immediately comparing the television set to the human
body, and therefore minor maladjustments in the set to warning
signals given off bv the body before it becomes seriously ill.

By "making this comparison, the copy relates the intricate,
technical working of a television set to something as commonplace
and familiar as the running nose that warns you of an approach
ing cold. Because of this comparison, some of the mystery of the
set is explained away; and the owner gains a new feeling of con
fidence in dealing with it himself, as something he understands.
this comparison distinguishes be
tween the relatively rare major breakdowns, and the far more
frequent minor maladjustments, which he can now treat himself
as easily as he'd take a cold tablet to stop his running nose.

And, at the same time,

2. 'By continuously describing these minor maladjustments
as 'warning signals" and "symptoms" rather than "breakdowns"
or "repairs." This makes them sound easily corrected---before real
trouble, which might require technical skill and complicated tools,
can develop out of them.

3. And finally, by stating outright that these minor adjust
ments can be corrected by "making a few minor adjustments, on
the outside controls of your set."

Therefore, "repairs" are redefined as "adjustments." Troubles
on the TV screen are redefined as 'warning signals" or "symp-


1 58

F O U R TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I ON

toms." And "repair calls" or "breakdowns" are carefully segregated
into the least-likely-to-occur 5% of all possible TV troubles.

Therefore, with this redefinition in mind--with this reorgan
ization of facts accomplished by the copy--there is no longer any
reason for the average set owner not to make his oivn minor ad
justments, rather than pay a repairman to make them for him.

The objective has been accomplished. The ad can now go
on to specifically state how much monev the owner will save by
making these adjustments--and where he can buv the book that
tells him how.

In exactly the same way, whenever there is a process which
is difficult. . . whenever there is a product which is hard to use,
or difficult to apply--the copywriters first task is to simplify that
application in his prospect's mind.

This holds especially true for new inventions which actually
simplify processes which formerly were too difficult for the av
erage prospect. A new breakthrough is not merely accepted be
cause its manufacturer says so. Its claims for ease and simplicity
must be proved, in the ad, or the reader will simply shrug his
shoulders and say "it's just another copywriter gone wild."

Such a situation is one of the most frustrating experiences
you can have. Here is a product which vou know is far easier to
use than anything ever introduced in this field before--because
you've used it! But no matter how loud you scream EASY in your
ads, people just seem to ignore vou.

What do you do? The answer is twofold:
1. Redefine (as this chapter shows vou).
2. Mechanize the new simplicity (as you'll see in the next

chapter).

Remember, innovation without acceptance is valueless. The
more people know that something is difficult, and the more rev
olutionary (and therefore different) your product is--the more
resistance you will meet from them in accepting it.

You must, therefore, lay a base for acceptance by redefining

the entire field for them, before vou bring in vour product.


F O U R TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I ON

l b9

Let's look at one more example of such breakthrough ad

vertising, and see the solutions the copy offered that made the

product a success.

One of the great ads of all times, of course, is the Sherwin
Codv ad. Though most advertising men are familiar with the ad,
they do not realize that the course itself was a tremendous de
parture for the times--far easier and simpler than anything else
that had gone before.

But the prospects for such a course were absolutely con
vinced that good English was too hard for them. They had tried
to learn it before, and had failed. Therefore, any new course that
could be successfully sold to them would have to redefine En
glish for them . . . redefine mistakes in English for them . . . and
certainly redefine the process of turning; bad English into good
English for them.

The Codv ad is a masterpiece of Gradualization. It should
be memorized--not merely studied--by every copywriter. How
ever, within it, in four paragraphs, is contained another master
piece of breakthrough redefinition--from hard to easy with a few
simple ideas--that goes like this:

Onlv 15 Minutes a Day.
Nor is there verv much to learn. In Mr. Cody's years
of experimenting, he brought to light some highly aston
ishing facts about English.

For instance, statistics show that a list of sixty-nine
words (with their repetitions) make up more than half of
all our speech and letter-icritin<i. Obviously, if we could
learn to spell, use and pronounce these words correctly,
we would go far toward eliminating incorrect spelling and
pronunciation.

Similarly, Mr. Cody proved that there were no more
than one dozen fundamental principles of punctuation. If
we mastered these principles, there would be no bugbear
of punctuation to hamper us in our writing.

Finally he discovered that twenty-five typical errors in
grammar constitute nine-tenths of our everyday mistakes.
When one has learned how to avoid these twenty-five


1 60

F O U R TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I ON

pitfalls, how readily one can obtain the facility of speech
which denotes the person of breeding and education!

When the study of English is made so simple, it be
comes clear that progress can be made in a very short time.
No more than fifteen minutes a dav is required

Thus

the complicated becomes simple--the hard becomes
easy. This is the first use of Redefinition. Now let's look at the
second:

2. Escalation

H e re you are dealing with a product which works, and which
is acknowledged to be easy enough to use--but which simply
does not have an appeal broad enough to assure it of a mass
market.

Your job here is to escalate your product. To give it more

importance in your prospect's eves.

You do this again by Redefinition. You broaden the horizon

of benefits of the product. You redefine the role that the prod
uct pla\ s in the prospect's life. You widen the area of reward that
your product yields to the prospect--showing him that it enters
into dozens of vital situations every day, paving off for him wherehe might least expect it.

For example, let's look at another ad for another English
course forty years later. By now people are not as sensitive to
their punctuation or grammar. Now the negative aspect has lost
its appeal; people want good English as a persuasion tool to win
over other people.

So good English must cease to be an end in itself. It must
be redefined, to become instead a means to a more important
end--one which is desired by far more people. And, since the
positive aspect must now be dominant, that part of good English
which lias the greatest value for persuading people--vocabulary--
must now be featured.


F O U R TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I ON

1 61

Here is the ad:

Revolutionary new Word Power Machine makes you

a master of English overnight.

Automatically gives vou a power-packed vocabulary--

to make your ideas crackle with excitement . .. to hold oth
ers spellbound with the power of vour speech and your
written word.

Automatically spots embarrassing errors in grammar,
spelling, pronunciation vou didn't even know you were
making. Clears them up at once. Frees vour mind from
worrv . . . lets you feel at ease in am- company . . . gives
vou the blazing new self-confidence vou need to make any
body like you--to win people over irresistiblv to your point
of view. . . .

This approach redefines the benefits of the product, shifting
them from a less desirable area to one that will generate more
sales appeal.

But this use of escalation--to increase benefit appeal--is only

one of the ways it can serve vou. Another is to increase the im
portance of the product--showing
that something the prospect
wants very much hinges directh upon the performance of your
product.

For example, in an ad for spark plugs, this fact was pointed

out to the reader:

Yes. You pay $2,000 . . . 83.000 . . . $4,000 for your car.
And a single 99c part robs i/ou of the real power and en
joyment that car should give you.

Or here, in an advertisement for a speed math course:

If you want to get ahead f a s t . .. if vou want a posi
tion of real importance and responsibility--then a knowl
edge of this kind of super-fast, super-accurate mathematics
is

'AN ABSOLUTE NECESSITY for your future!

Or escalation can be used to show the prospect that your
product is not something to be put to work just once or twice a


1 62

F O U R TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I ON

week--but that it will be needed, and used, by him almost e v en
waking minute. Here's how this was done, in a single sub head
line, in an ad for a course on handling people:

Your Entire Life is Spent Trying to Get Others to Do

What You Want--Without Fricti Oil:

You must agree with this statement. And therefore you must
redefine the importance to yourself of a technique which allows
you to accomplish the all-pervading task more easily, more ef
fectively and more rapidly

This is the second use of Redefinition--escalation. Now let's

look at the third.

3. Price Reduction

Here you have the product which, quite simply, costs too
much. Your job is to make that price seem less. You do it by a
very simple act of redefinition, like this:

Why does

the product cost too much? Because

it's being
compared icith other products in the same field. And how do you
whittle away, psychologically, at this price? Bij switching the com
it to some other, more expensive standard.
parison, and relating

For example, here is an enormously successful mail order ad
for spark plugs, which sold for $1.49 each, or one and a half
times the standard for the field, and twice as much as the dis
count price. Did the copywriter therefore sav that "Thev mav
cost a little more, but they're worth every cent of it." Of course
not. He made them cheap, and he did it in these two paragraphs
of psychological redefinition:

Up to now these extraordinary SA FIRE INJECTORS
were practically made by hand and would have to sell for
as high as $5 each. But we knew that 30 or 40 dollars was
more than the average driver could afford--so we decided
to get the price down so low that these injectors would pav
for themselves 12 times in one year of driving. So here is


F O U R TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I ON

lb.3

inv astonishing proposition. If you will check your cars per
formance before and after you install your SA Fire Injec
tor System and then tell your friends and neighbors about
them, here is what I am prepared to do for TOIL

You can have a set of SA FIRE INJECTORS for the
year and model of your ear for only a fraction of their
value. If you act now they are only SI.49 each. . . .

Do you see how he does it? Do you see how many times
he does it in these two short paragraphs? As a last review of re
definition--because its techniques are so important to you--let's
just list the individual phrases that build up. again and again, the
feeling of value and bargain.

Here they are. Did vou catch them all?
"practically made by hand . .
"would have to sell for as hi^h as So each . . ."
"30 or 40 dollars . . ." (Notice that he repeats the hand-made
price twice. First he gives it to vou per plug; and then jor the
entire set. Thus the new comparative price is reinforced; you
practically wince at the $40 figure since vou want the plugs by
this time. And you're going to feel pretty good when he brings
in the now-lower figure in the next paragraph.)

"pet the price down so low . . ." (Here is the magic word,
"low"; now legitimatized in your exes by the description of the
hand-made set in the phrases that preceded it.)

"that

these

injectors would pay for themselves 12

in
one year of driving. . ." (Not only value, but reward. Not only
low-priced, but gas-saving. And again, the comparison to a higher
figure--this time the money you'll save on gas.)

times

"astonishing proposition . . ." (Now the price becomes so low
that the mere statement of it may cause you surprise. It may
sound slightlv cornv as we dissect it here, but it is incredibly ef
fective in the context of the ad. And most of it--perhaps all of
it--is never consciously noticed by the prospect. He simply re
alizes that he feels that a bargain is being offered to him.)

"If you will check your car's performance. . . and tell your


1 64

F O U R TH T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I ON

friends and neighbors about them . . ." (The introduction of a con
dition--an action you must perform--in order to get the nowlow price. Used before in the last chapter in a different context:
here we see how the same device works again to substantiate.
with equal power, the feeling of value.)

"prepared to do . . ." (Again the connotation of favor, of al

lowance, of discount.)

"You can have . . ." (Not, "You can buy." He is letting vou
have the plugs at the low price. Again, he is doing vou a favor.
You are getting a bargain.)

"only $1.49 each . . ." (The classic modifier. The tenth bargain-

phrase in these two paragraphs.)

Notice how similar Gradualization and Redefinition are. No
tice how each operates below the surface of the conscious mind.
Gradualization by its structure--by its arrangement of facts and
phrases. Redefinition by its rearrangement of perspective.

Each is an extremely subtle and powerful wav of building
belief. Each deserves much more study than we can give it in
this book.

Let us now turn to some equally powerful but more appar

ent mechanisms that also build belief.


11

THE FIFTH TECHNIQUE
OF BREAKTHROUGH
COPY: MECHANIZATION

How to Verbally Prove That Your
Product Does What You Claim

As we have observed repeatedlv,
good advertising copy exists simultaneously in two different places.
Part of that copy is words on a page. Or sounds carried by
radio waves. Or pictures and sounds coming out of a television set.
But the other part of that copy--the crucial part--takes place
in your prospect's brain. It is the series of reactions--planned re
actions and anticipated reactions--that your copy causes in his
mind and his emotions.

Actually, when your prospect reads your copy, he is engag
ing in a silent dialogue with you. You are feeding him ideas and
images and emotions, in a planned pattern; and he is feeding
back to you reactions to these ideas and images and emotions.

You hope--you plan--that these reactions will be favorable.

165


I bb

F I F TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION

That they will be controlled reactions. That he will see the im
ages you are projecting. That he will understand and agree with
the ideas that you are advocating. That he will share the emo
tions you are suggesting he feel, and even embellish and inten
sify them.

But also, at the same moment, vou must be aware of the
fact that--included among these reactions--are also a number of
inevitable anticipations, or demands, or questions on his part. And
you must answer these questions or vour copv will fail.

What are these demands he is going to make from time to

time on your copy? Basically they fall into three classes:

1. Demands for more information, more image, more de
sire. You have whetted his appetite; now you've got to satisfy it.
He is saying to vou: "Tell me more."

2. Demands for proof. He knows he wants it; now he wants
to know that it's true. He is telling you: "Oh veah? Who savs so?"
3. Demands for a mechanism. He knows he wants the end
result; now he wants to know how you're going to give it to him.
He is saying: "How does it work?"

To write good copv, you have to play a dual role. At the
same time, you have to be copywriter and prospect. You have to
develop an almost foolproof sensitivity to these inevitable reac
tions. You have to know the exact point that they are going to
come in. You have to anticipate them. You have to switch copv
direction, fill in the wanted material, at the precise point that
your prospect loses interest in one theme and demands the other.

This is one of the most difficult parts of writing copv, and
the exact spot where many good ads break down and lose their
prospect. And--since such anticipation points occur several times
in a single ad--you will find yourself working over the same para
graph of "unimportant" copy hour after hour. All vou know is
that at
this point vour
prospect is dissatisfied.

this point something went wrong--at

We will discuss these problems of copy direction . . . antici
in Chapter 14, on Interweaving. At this

pation points . . . etc.


F I F TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION

1 67

point, however, let's look more eloselv at the third demand: the
demand for Mechanism.

Verbal Proof

This is the vital question: "Hoiv does it work0" Your prospect
is asking you here to give him a mechanism. He likes what vou
promise--he wants what vou promise--but he has to be con
vinced that your product can aetuallv give it to him.

You have to demonstrate vour product, in words, logically,

so that he can understand exactly H OW it gives him the end re
sult you promise.

this

information--that provides

Since the beginning of advertising, of course, the eopv that
furnishes
this mechanism--has
been called "Reason YVhv" copv. Claude Hopkins was its master.
But there have been few great selling ads of anv period that do
not use it to convince their prospect that their product actually
works.

In fact, the basic question vou must ask yourself, about this
device, when you sit down to write a piece of copy, is not, "Should
I use it?" Or "Should I build a mechanism into this copv?" But
simply: "How much?"

How much mechanism does this copv need? This, of course,
depends--as so many other things in vour cop}'--on the State of
Awareness of your prospect. Is he familiar with the mechanism
by which this product works? Does he accept it? If so, then this
part of your job is done for vou. Other advertisers have spent
their money to make this mechanism familiar to vour prospect.

Stage One: Name the Mechanism

You ma}' now take advantage of their investment bv simply
naming the mechanism, and going on to beat them with your
price or other features.

For instance, in the conventional camera ad, to back the


168

FIFTH TECHNIQUE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION

headline claim, all that you'd have to do is name your mechanisms, like this:

TAKE FOOLPROOF PHOTOS
WITH THE XENOPHON 1750

With Electronic Light Setter. . . Push-Button Zomar

Lens . . . Magazine Load . . . Only $135.

Here, the three mechanisms which insure the perfect pic
tures are simply named, and not described at all. The prospect
is already familiar with the way they work from the other ads he
has seen, and any further detailing of their nuts and bolts would
simply bore him. Therefore, you name them in as bold type as
possible, and go on to compete with your price.

Most catalog copy and retail copy needs to assume only this
abbreviated form. It deals with products which are already known,
and whose mechanisms are already understood and accepted.
Therefore, any further wordage on these points would only be
wasted.

But now we come to that vast array of products whose mech

anism cannot simply be named. Why? For two basic reasons:

Stage Two: Describe the Mechanism

1. Because the prospect doesn't understand their mechanism

And

2. Because everybody else has the same mechanism, and the
same promise, and the same price. And the market is getting
tired, and you need a new way to compete.

Let's look at the simplest case--case #1--first:
Here your mechanism is not so well known, or not known
at all, and you can't simply name it. You have to go into more
detail; you have to describe it.

So you have the classic situation of Promise--Reason Whv.
You build a strong, quick promise--and then you follow up with
the reason why you can deliver that promise.


F I F TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION

169

This one-two punch of promise and reason whv is as old as
advertising itself. Here, for instance, is how Rinso used it in 1926.
First thev give the promise, like1 this:

Who else wants a whiter wash--with no hard work?
How would vou like to see vour wash come out of
a simple soaking--whiter than hours of scrubbing could
make it!

Millions of women do it everv week. Thev've given
up washboards for good. ThevYe freed themselves forever
from the hard work and reddened hands of washdav.

Now thev just soak--rinse--and hang out to drv! In
half the time, without a hit ol hard rubbing, the wash is
on the line--whiter titan ever!

Notice how the original promise in the headline has been
taken and intensified in these first thi'ee paragraphs of copv. The
promise is repeated, in different words and from different per
spectives, over and over again in those first three paragraphs.

But notice too that--as the copv builds desire--it also builds
a growing reaction on the part of the woman reading it. This re
action can be expressed in one word: "Hoic?" This promise sounds
better and better . .. it begins to sound too good to be true . . .
now she needs reassurance fast.

So the whiteness claims stop. The copv shifts direction--and

now begins to sell the mechanism,

like this:

Dirt floats off--stains <jo.
The secret is simplv Rinso--a mild, granulated soap

that gives rich, lasting suds even in the hardest water.

Just soak the clothes in the ereamv Rinso suds--
and the dirt and stains float off. Rinse--and the wash is
spotless.

Even the most soiled parts need onlv a gentle rub be
tween the fingers to make them snowv. Thus clothes last
longer, for there's no hard rubbing against a board.

Notice, first of all, that this mechanism--the suds that float
off dirt--is sold just as hard as the whiteness storv it is brought
in to prove. The first rule of mechanism copv is that it is not


1 70

F I F TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION

scientific discourse. You must never allow it to become dull, or
merelv factual. You must load it with promise, load it with emo
tion. Every word in good copy--including mechanism copy--
sells. Only in these paragraphs, the copy is selling a secondary
claim (dirt floating off) that proves the primary claim (a whiter
wash). But still--it sells.

Secondly, of course, you'll immediately notice how simple
the mechanism is in this 1926 copy, as compared with the same
field today. In those days it was enough to mention the facts that
the suds floated off the dirt; the reader accepted, as an evident
truth, the fact that they would do so.

Today, of course, in our much more sophisticated and ex
ploited market, she would no longer do so. Todav vou would need
far more mechanism. You would have to explain more, promise'
deeper, perhaps even invent a miracle ingredient to do the work
for vou.

Stage Three: Feature the Mechanism

Which brings us to case #2 and the difficult problem of what
to do when vour market is highly sophisticated . . . when prom
ises sound alike . . . when price competition becomes suicidal?

This takes us back to Chapter 3, where we discussed marketsophistication from another perspective. Here we discovered that
mechanism--strong mechanism--saleable mechanism--is not onlv
a way to build belief, but may actually become so important to the
success of your product that you must put it into the headline.

These headlines are all mechanism headlines:

"FLOATS FAT RIGHT OUT OF YOUR BODY."

"FIRST WONDER DRUG FOR REDUCING."

"RUN YOUR CAR WITHOUT SPARK PLUGS."

"SHRINKS HEMORRHOIDS WITHOUT SURGERY."

"TOMMY ARMOUR SAYS SMACK HELL OUT OF
THE BALL WITH YOUR RIGHT HAND."


F I F TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION

1 71

And hundreds more. Even/ one of them offers

i/oti a new
way to get what i/ou've been wanting. A NEW7 WAY: a new mech
anism; a new chance to satisfy your desire--even if everything
else vou've tried has failed vou.

Mechanism, therefore, can he inside vour ad, to prove vour
main claim, or on top of the ad. elevated bv the state of your
market to becoming the main claim.

If people assume that thev know how vour product works.

or if vour claim is so new that thev don't care, then all the mech
anism you need can be summed up in a word or a phrase.

If people are not quite sure how it works, describe the mech

anism--in selling language--until
to believe vou.

thev have enough reason-whv

If you have, however, an exceptionally strong or dramatic
mechanism, or if you want to establish definite superiorih" to
other competing products, then sell hell out of that mechanism.
We'll see some expert examples of how to do this in our next
chapter, on Concentration- when we're sliown how to compare
your product with the rest of vour field.

On the Importance of Mechanism When You Want
to Convince Your Reader That You're
Giving Him a Bargain

One of the sad truths of our time--and profession--is that
our readers do not always beliexe the truth when we tell it to
them. Everv copy writer has had. at one time or another, a per
fectly marvelous product that just couldn't be sold--because people
wouldn't believe that it could do what he knew it could do.

In the same way manv manufacturers, and their agencies,
are startled when thev cut a price--advertise the reduction--and
see no increase in sales.

What happened? No one believed them. A price cut--like
a product advantage--is only as good as vour words, and vour
strategy, makes it.


1 72

F I F TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION

Price cuts must be justified. There must be a reason for
them. A mechanism behind them. Without such a mechanism--
without such a reason-why you should give this bargain--you are
going to get only a fraction of its real sales power.

The great master of price-cut mechanization was Robert Col
lier. His book--The Robert Collier Letter Book--is one of the
great classics of copvwriting know-how. Here is just one example
of how Collier made his price-cuts, not only believable, but
dramatic:

Before the Price Goes Up!
Dear Sir:
A short time ago one of the old, reliable mills that
makes the finer qualities of woven Madras for shirts began
sending out S.O.S. calls.

They had kept their plant going steadily for months,
thinking that the usual demand would easily take care of
their excess output.

But, with the weather so generally unseasonable, the
usual demand didn't materialize. And there thev were, heav
ily overstocked--and needing money.

If we would take all their surplus stock of the finer
grades of woven Madras, amounting to a quarter of a mil
lion yards, they offered to let us have them at wav below
any price we had ever paid for shirtings in all our years in
business--at far less than they could make the materials
and sell them for today.

We took them--the whole quarter-million yards--at a

tremendous savings in cost. . . .

A Bargain You May Never Get Again. . . .

this

Let me point out

the difference between

logical.
carefully-prepared introduction to the price slash, and a simple.
bare announcement of that slash. Here, the copy writer not onlv
emphasizes bargain over and over again, but brings in qualiti/
as a counter-desire time after time. He thus uses a mechanism
within a mechanism: (1) the unseasonable weather causing (21
the factory to become overstocked resulting in the primary markdown--to build belief upon belief.


F I F TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION

173

Here the copv starts with the mechanism, and onlv goes into
the bargain claims six paragraphs later. Again, he has taken the
Creative Gamble: in this case, that he could hold the reader's in
terest for those six paragraphs. And. because of this gamble, lie
reaps ten times the believabilitv for e v en word he said about the
bargain-value of his offer from that point on.


12

THE SIXTH TECHNIQUE
OF BREAKTHROUGH
COPY: CONCENTRATION

How to Destroy Alternate Ways for
Your Prospect to Satisfy His Desire

As vou know, in the final analysis,
no successful copy ever sells a product. It sells a way of satisfy
ing a particular desire. And its power to sell ultimately comes
from the intensity of that desire.

If the desire is commercial--that is, if it is shared by masses
of people, and if each of these people want that satisfaction enough
to pay the price required for a mechanism to satisfy it--then it
is highly probable that many firms will try to deliver that mech
anism, or product, to them.

The almost universal condition of commercial life is compe
tition. No one who sells am'thing, of course, can avoid it. As you
write, one eye is fixed on your market, and the other on your
competitors.

We have described in this book several different ways of


1 76

SIXTH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CONCENTRATION

beating competition. Let's stop for a moment and review them:
First, of course, is superiority of product. This is the ulti
mate weapon in the war for the consumers dollar. If you pro
duce the best product, your advertising has a hundred times the
chance of success than if you produce only a fair product. Most
great ads have been associated with great products. Most great
copy claims come from the assembly line. If vours does not. if
your copy is better than your product, then send it to vour client
instead of 