your prospect, and tell him to make it a reality.

But even the best product needs equally as effective cop\
to induce people to try it. Otherwise, the excessive cost of get
ting the first purchase may drive the product off the market, be
fore the repeat sales can build up high enough to earn- it through.
So we come to our second weapon to beat competition--su
periority of promise. A stronger promise, that evokes more de
sire. A wider promise, that causes more people to buv. A more
believable promise, that brings in the skeptics as well as the sus
ceptible. This entire book has been a blueprint for developing
such promises.

Third, we have the weapon of product-role. The role the
product allows its consumer to plav. The personality, the identi
fication, the prestige, the status, the excitement vou can bring
out of your product, or graft onto it.

Fourth, we have response and reaction as a competitive
force--the ability to one-up the competition: to escalate claims
when necessary; to shift mechanisms; to invade new markets.

And fifth--the technique we will discuss in this chapter--is

direct attack.

Direct attack--the mechanism of Concentration-- differs
completely from the other four methods we have discussed above.
All these techniques have the common element of ignoring the
competition. They concentrate on your storv, ,/our proniises^/o//;-
benefits, your product. They act as though'there is no other winpossible of gaining the satisfaction your prospect desires.

Therefore, they are most effective when vou dominate a


SIXTH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CONCENTRATION

1 77

field, when vour primary problem is to protect your customers'
lovalty against the claims of your competitor, or when your story
is so powerful, so different, or so fresh that the competition has
nothing to match it. In these cases, it's better not to give him
the prestige of attack, not to mention his claims or his product,
even invidiously, in the space which costs you such a dear dollar.
But in many other cases--especially where your advertising
budget is much less than his--especially where the bulk of your
prospects are already customers of his--your first problem may
be to crack his image, to shatter their loyalty, before you can
rechannel their desire around to vou.

What Concentration Is

But this process of Concentration--this careful, logical, doc
umented process of proving ineffectual other ways of satisfying
vour prospect's desire--is much more than mere attack. If you
can only attack another product--without showing at the same
time, by comparison, how your product provides what the other
lacks--then say nothing at all! Never attack a weakness unless
you can provide the solution to that weakness at the same time!
The reason for this is simple. Your prospect knows that your
attack is biased. If, therefore, you are attacking another product
onlv for your own good--in other words, to win the sale by dis
paraging your competitor--what you will probably evoke in his
mind is skepticism and dislike, and very little else.

But--and this is the critical point in this process--if you can
show your customer that this attack is for his own good, in his
sendee, because your product will eliminate this weakness, then
you have a sales story he will accept. Then you will make him
question even the most ingrained loyalty.

Concentration, therefore, is the process of pointing out weak
nesses in the competition . . . emphasizing their disservice to your
prospect . . . and then proving to him that your product gives him
what he wants without them.


1 78

SIXTH T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: CONCENTRATION

Notice that all the techniques that we have developed in the
last few chapters are used here. Intensification to show the penal
ties of continuing with the old product. Gradualization
to show
the logical cause of the weaknesses and how thev can now be
cured. Mechanization
the
weakness. And so on.

that your product removes

to prove

Concentration is therefore a complicated process, taking up
sizable space to do its job properlv, and combining almost every
trick you have learned in this book. To see how incredibly ef
fective it can be, however, let us look at two masterful examples.

The first is our spark plug ad again. As vou remember, in
the copy, the copy writer has told his prospect that he can run
his car without spark plugs, that he can get more gas mileage
and more power if he puts "fire injectors" into his car instead of
the old-fashioned plugs.
Now he goes on to:
1. Provide the mechanisms which prove his own claim; and
2. To destroy the prospect's confidence in plugs forever, in

this brilliant piece of interweaving copy:

MECHANICS AND ENGINEERS
READ THIS CAREFULLY

And for you mechanics and engineers let me tell vou

why fire injection must give vou these results.

A spark plug jumps a spark of electricity across an air
gap. This is the most wasteful and power consuming wav
to get electricity from one place to another and it limits
the size of the spark.

Afire injector fires on the surface of an electrical con
ductor This is the most efficient wav to get a big power
ful spark into your cylinder.

On ordinary spark plugs the air gap between the elec
trode and the firing point is always getting bigger because
the electrode is always burning awav. This means vou have
misfiring which means loss of power plus wasted gas plus
raw gas to damage the cylinders and piston rings. On fire
injectors there is no air gap and no electrode to burn away.
That means maximum gas explosion which means full


SIXTH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CONCENTRATION

179

power, full economy and no raw gas to wash away the oil
protection from cylinder walls and pistons.

A spark plug accumulates filth and carbon because oi
inefficient firing. This means vou need regular cleaning,
setting and expensive replacement!

A fire injector never needs cleaning or setting. It ac
tually- "breaks in" and becomes more efficient with use. It
will actually outlast your car, delivering maximum efficiency
without servicing or replacement.

A spark plug gives you a thin skimpy spark that ac
tually blows out under pressure of less than 120 pounds.

A fire injector gives you a heavy powerful flame that
will not blow out at pressures far heavier than those cre
ated bv even the highest compression engine. . . .

With ordinary spark plugs you are using, or should
he using premium gas which costs from 4 to 8 cents more
than ordinary gas, and despite this you're getting ineffi
cient, wasteful gas consumption.

With fire injectors regular gas will give you up to 8
more gas miles per gallon, up to 31 more horsepower, plus
easier starting in all weather. Add these savings together
and see for yourself whv I sav that fire injectors will pay
for themselves every single month that you drive your car.
Ordinary spark plugs have to he replaced regularly.
In some of the new high-compression cars, a set of plugs
will burn up in a couple of months.

Afire injector installation is guaranteed for the life of

your car without cleaning, servicing, or replacing.

These are some of the reasons that the U.S. Air Force
pays premium prices for surface supported
for
their aircraft and why vou will ultimately find fire injec
tors in all automobiles. . . .

injectors

Let's See How He D o es It

I hope that by now you have spotted many of the techniques
he uses to gain his effects . .. to build the overall power of this
sequence. Let's just check off a few of them right now:

First, of course, is the interweaving contrast. A weakness in
the operation of the spark plug is pointed out, and then immedi-


1 80

SIXTH T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: CONCENTRATION

ately counteracted by the benefit the injector gives you. Bad--
good; bad--good; bad--good: this is the underlying structure of
this sequence.

But this is only one use he makes of parallelism. He repeats
words to contrast the inherent weakness of the plug with the in
herent strength of the injector. "A spark plug jumps a spar*.
"Afire injector fires on. . . ." Spark is a weak word; fire is much
stronger visually And he later intensifies this contrast of image
by saying: "A spark plug gives you a thin skimpy spark.
against "A fire injector gives you a heavy, powerful
You can picture the difference.

flame

"

Throughout the copy, definition and re-definition take place.
Spark firing is the "most wasteful and power consuming way" as
opposed to "the most efficient way to get a big powerful spark."
Misfiring means "loss of power plus . . . ," while maximum gas ex
plosion means full power, full economy. . . ." (Notice the parallel
sentence structure here sharpening the contrast.)

And, in a beautiful image, the fire injector actuallv "breaks

in"--a masterpiece of redefinition by analogy.

Of course, almost every benefit has its documentary- mech
anism. The air gap in ordinary plugs gets bigger "because the
electrode is burning away." The spark plug gets dirtv "because of
inefficient firing." And so on.

Let me point out again the general structure of this sequence

It is:

*

Bad.
Good.
Bad.
Good.
Bad.
Good.

And so on. It thus offers repeated, direct, one-for-one con
trast. It explores a number of performance factors of vital inter
est in the prospect--showing the bad and then the good side of
each of them.


SIXTH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CONCENTRATION

1 81

A Second Strategy

This is one way of accomplishing your Concentration. But,
of course, it is not always feasible, because the points you wish
to contrast mav not be so easily and clearly broken down, one
bv one. You may be dealing, instead, with a time sequence--a
recurring, unpleasant experience with which the prospect is fa
miliar, and which you wish to sharpen before you provide him
with the antidote.

In this case your Concentration copy would adopt a differ

ent structure. Something that looks more like this:

What happens to you now. with the product or products you

are using presentlv.

What will happen when vou switch to the new product.
Here is such a structure, for an ad selling a reducing pill.

Let's look first at the negative copy:

For years doctors have known that ordinary reducing
plans--that vou pay S5, $10 and even 815 for in the stores--
are completely passive! That they depend strictly on your
own will power--on vour ability to starve that fat off your
bodv. All that these ordinary reducing plans are able to
give' vou . .. for vour $5 or 810 or S15--are HUNGERAPPEASING PRODUCTS--pills, powders and liquids that
do nothing more than swell up in your stomach--that do
nothing more than "dull" your hunger a little.

But not one of these products could do anything to
ACTIVELY help you reduce your weight. To take the strain
off that starvation diet. To actually help vou BURN UP
that uglv fat. . . OXIDIZE that fat. . . MELT IT AWAY--
FOREVER!

So what happened? If you were overweight, you strug
gled to do the job of reducing BY YOURSELF! You took
vour hunger-appeasing pills religiously. You pushed away
the foods vou love. You spent week after week of torture.
And finally, if vou were lucky; you carved off 5, 10, or even
12 precious pounds.

And then your will power snapped! You broke your
terrible diet. You discovered that your little pills were use-


1 82

SIXTH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CONCENTRATION

less to keep you away from the foods vou loved. And the
fat flowed back--heavier and uglier and more deadhj than
ever before!

Again, let's glance at the means the writer used to get his

b

total effect.

In the first and second paragraphs--Definitions and Redef
inition. Ordinary reducing plans are passive. They depend on vour
own will power. They can do nothing to actively bum up fat.

And in the third paragraph, the equating of taking ordinarv

reducing pills with "doing the job of reducing yourself."

^ Next, logic--cause and effect. Given the acceptance of these
definitions by the reader, the third and fourth paragraphs become
a logical necessity. This tone of cause and effect is conveved in
the phrase: "So what happened?"

Now, of course, the third and fourth paragraphs condense
an experience which is all too common to everv woman who has
ever tried to reduce. She has lived through this herself, time after
time. She recognizes each of the symptoms. And so she finds her
self nodding her head, agreeing with each in its turn, building
up a stream of acceptances which carries more and more con
viction as she finds her own experiences more and more thor
oughly described.

And then, at the climax, in the last line of the fourth para
graph, the destniction of the old methods of reducing is complete.
Notice the use of the word "And" to tie this final indictment in
structurally with the stream of sensory experiences that have gone
before it. There is no doubt that the fat has come back again in
this woman's life--if it hadn't, she wouldn't have read this much
of the ad. But here the inevitable implication buried in a sentence
with which no woman could disagree--is
the failure
of the pills

that
that caused the failure of the diet.

icas

it

Thus the stage is set for the hero-product to emerge. It has
already been foreshadowed in the second paragraph--in the neg
ative accusations that these ordinary methods can do nothing
"actively" to "burn awav" fat.


SIXTH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CONCENTRATION

1 83

Now the copv goes on, from failure to promise, like this:

And so vou tried another passive plan. And another.
And another. And then if vou were like the men and women
whose fantastic case histories w ere reported by leading med
ical journals--perhaps vou went to vour doctor and asked
him for an easy way out--without torture--and without
sliding hack!

These doctors had the answer in a tiny grey pill--and

a common-sense plan.

In their hands--so tinv that thev could balance it on
the tip of their little finger--was perhaps the greatest
weapon ever discovered against deadlv, excess fat. It was
called LECITHIN--branda miraculous
new--whose amazing fat-dissolving properties had been
discovered bv a Nobel prize winner--the co-discoverer
of insulin. . . .

compound

Because this product was perfectly safe--and as easy
to take as an aspirin--main had used it themselves when
they wanted to lose weight. . . .

Thev were not given am starvation diets . . . thev never
experienced a single hungry moment . . . they reported, in
case after case, that thev felt more pep. more energy, more
youth and vitality than thev had known in years!

And then, dav after dav faster and easier and safer
than thev had ever known before, the ugly excess fat around
their bodies melted awav! While thev were eating three de
licious meals a dav, thev were shedding as much as 5 pounds
thev were feasting on mouth-watering
a week. While
steaks. . . .

And so on. Right back into Intensification copy, with its strong

picture-image sell.

Here are vour contrast--vour mechanization--your docu
mentation--your reference to authority--and then your return to
promise, in the form of case history, which now has many times
its original power, based on both the elimination of alternate chan
nels of fulfillment, and the strong supporting mechanism which
documents its claims.


184

SIXTH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CONCENTRATION

One Final Word on Concentration

I have purposely chosen extreme examples to illustrate each
mechanism. These copy blocks are longer than Concentration
need logically be. The same effect may be boiled down into two
or three sentences, or even a single phrase, as in this classic
headline:

"SHRINKS HEMORRHOIDS WITHOUT SURGERY."

Here is contrast--implied weakness in other products--com

pensating promise in vour own.

Again, it is not the content, nor is it the length of copy used
in a mechanism that makes it effective. It is simply and solelv
the problem it solves for you in the development of your copy--
by the emotional reaction it produces on your reader when he
encounters it.

If, in this case, vou have caused him to question a habit . . .
shift a lovalty . . . take a chance on your product--you have done
your job, no matter how few or how many words vou have used
to do it.


13

THE SEVENTH
TECHNIQUE OF
BREAKTHROUGH COPY:
CAMOUFLAGE

How to Borrow Conviction for Your Copy

We have now discussed five sep
arate wavs to build believabilitv into vour copv. I do not think
we should leave this subject without at least mentioning one other,
entirely different, approach--that oi borrowing believabilitv from
all the places in our society where it is stored up.

The process bv which vou do this is quite simple. As vou
know, people do not bin' a newspaper, or a magazine, or anv
other medium of communication for its ads at all. They buv this
publication--or thev turn on their radio and television set--to
keep in touch icith the world around them; to learn what's hap
pening, and whv it's happening. To be entertained, or enlight
ened, or simplv kept up to date.

Now, when a person chooses one of the publications (and
for a moment we'll disregard radio and television), he does so
because he believes that that publication is telling him the truth.
He has faith in that publication. He believes in it.

185


1 86

SEVENTH T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: CAMOUFLAGE

And, as long as he has faith in that publication (as any space
buyer can tell you) it remains an excellent medium for advertising--because some of his trust carries over from the editorial
pages to the advertising pages. He simply assumes that his pub
lication wouldn't carry the ad if it weren't true.

And, on the other hand, when he loses faith in that publi
cation, the effectiveness of its advertising just goes to pieces. If
he no longer believes in the publication, he won't believe in the
advertising it carries. This factor--the believability in the medium
itself--I think is a far more important consideration in buying
space than mere circulation.

All this is of vital interest to the space buyer, of course, but
we have to go a step further. You see, not only does this reader
come to believe in the publication which he buys repeatedly, but
after a while he becomes used to receiving his tmth couched in
the style and format and phraseology of that particular publication.
In other words, a conditioned reflex has been formed here.
The man believes in the publication. The publication phrases its
material in a certain way. After a while, that phraseology begins
to carry an aura of truth all by itself no matter what material
it embraces.

Thus, you have waiting for your ad--if it is adapted the right
way--a stored believability. A believability reflex. Which you can
tap by adopting this particular publication's phraseology when you
address its audience.

Let's Look at a Few Examples

I'll try to show you the three different ways you can borrow

this built-up believability:

First, of course, and most obvious, is Format. Each publi

cation has its own look. You have your copy. Your job is to merge
both of them into a combination that will:

1. Allow the reader to enter into your ad with the least
possible mental shifting of gears from "editorial" to "advertise
ment."


SEVENTH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CAMOUFLAGE

Vr> I

2. Carrv along the greatest possible amount of believability

through every sentence of the ad.

I have not discussed layout in this book, because I do not be
lieve layout is nearly as effective as copy in determining the re
sults of your ad. Here, however, layout is important. A single change
in format can add 50% to your readership, and your results.

Your job here, once again, is to approximate as closely as
possible the format of the medium in which you are advertising.
This means, ideally, letting them set vour ad . . . using their kind
of headline-to-body-copy transition . . . using their illustrations,
their sub heads, their break-up of space.

On the following pages are two ads for the same book on
handling people. The first is an all-purpose, house-set magazine
ad that was shotgunned over twelve or fifteen media. It was mildly
successful.

The second is the same ad. adapted feature for feature for
the Wall Street Journal. It was enormously successful--so much
so that it has been repeated i at the time of this writing) nine
teen times, once a month, with no drop-off in pull.

Let's look at the changes that give this adapted format such

continued believability:

1. The headline, set by the journal in journal type. There
is no difference between this old-fashioned, upper-and-lower-case
headline and any other headline in the editorial content of this
issue. Therefore, it does not immediately signal the reader: "This
is an ad: beware!" To have made it bolder, or more modern, or
in all caps, would simply diminish its effectiveness.

2. The sub headlines--two of them, one following directly
on the other. Verv Nineteenth Century, really. Abandoned years
ago by 99% of all American newspapers. But the Journal uses it,
and therefore the ad uses the same treatment. And the very fact
that it is so unusual, and so old-fashioned, makes its adaptation
that much more belief-carrying in this context.



1S9


190

SEVENTH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CAMOUFL A(.I

3. The two bars directly above and below the first sub head
touches that defines individualitv. The ac
One of those small
would lose some of its atmosphere without them. And atmo
sphere (believabilitv,
is what you're seeking with these
adaptations.

trust)

4. The placement of subheads to the extreme left of the col
umn. Another minute detail. Bad lavout according to the a^encx
art director. But again, in perfect harmony with the format of
the editorial content.

5. The line drawing of the author. An uglv rendering. Far
less attractive than the photograph of the same man in the mag
azine ad. And yet the Journal does not use photographs of the
men they picture in their editorial columns. And so this ad must
do the same, even at the cost of harrowing screams of pain from
its authors (until they see their rovaltv checks).

Thus, what has been done by these adaptations, is that a
corny, old-fashioned, rather ugly advertisement has been devel
oped for this specific medium--which has about twice the be
lievability, twice the pulling power, and twice the staving power
of
the massproduced wav.

the same exact copy and

illustration presented

Is it worth the extra cost? Yes. Should it be done for each

important medium in turn? Yes.

Why? Because in so doing, you are tapping the ingrained
trust that the reader has for each medium in turn, and channel
ing at least part of it, unconsciously, onto vour product.

This, then, is the first method of borrowing this built-in be

lievability: adopting format.

The Second Way to Borrow Believabilitv

The second--slighth- less specific--is adopting phraseology.
This method stems from the fact that certain media, or classes
of media, use certain stereotyped phrases over and over again,
which after a while take on a believabilitv of their own.


S E V E N TH T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CAMOUFLAGE

1 91

In newspapers, to take the most obvious example, there is
usually an issue date, a city of origin, and perhaps a by-line. Each
of these news-indicators may be picked up by the copv writer to
add believability to his opening, as in this extremely successful
example:

SKIN SPECIALIST DEMONSTRATES

HOW TO RINSE AWAY YOUR BLACKHEADS
Bv Claire Hoffman

New York, N.Y.--A

leading doctor today
showed an audience of men. women and skintroubled teenagers how to clean oily skin and
shrink enlarged pores with a lO-minute home med
ical treatment he has perfected. . . ."

And so on. The news tone has been set by the opening phrases.
The entire remainder of the copy has been given the atmosphere
of a report rather than a sales story by these first few sentences.
The same principle can be used for each of the other classes
look for the key cor
of media vou employ.
that are opened instantly
respondence your prospect receives
without exception. Some examples would be refund checks, gov
ernment correspondence, dividend notices, confidential reports,
high-priced newsletters, etc.

In direct mail,

In radio and TV, adopt the news format and the news phrase

ology'. Even, if possible, adopt the news "sound"--the clipped
phrase of the newscaster, the insider tone of the analyst, the doc
umentary feel of the news, hand-held camera.

Study the channels of communication that people believe in.
Adopt their tone, their feel, their style, their sincerity. Make your
ads blend in, so there is no jarring transition. Camouflage them.

Believability-Borrowing Strategy #3

In a later chapter, we'll deal with mood directly. However,
as the last method of borrowing believability, I want to mention


1 92

SEVENTH T E C H N I Q IE OK BHKAKTIIROl•(;H COPY: CAMOl IT,A(.l

that rightly belong j„

two mood adaptations

this discussion.
We've seen that you borrow vour publications format and
your publications phraseology or stvle. These two methods ol
adding confidence to your copy depend directly on the particu
lar medium you are using at am particular moment.

You pick up that publications appearance and idiom, as it
were, because people have come to contrast that editorial man
ner of presentation with ••advertising language" in general and
because they automatically trust the first, and automatically ap
proach the second with an ingrained skepticism.

In other words, advertising language, which is .mite naturalK
biased language and emotionally-charged language, tends to pro
duce a counter-reaction in its prospects bv its verx appearance.
To overcome this instant and automatic skepticism--besides
borrowing our host publications idiom--we also have two other
idioms which allow us to escape the -hard-sell" stereohpe.

The

first

is Understatement. Simplicity. A

lack'of color

words. Fewer adjectives than the reader would expect
\o su
perlatives. Short sentences, that fall rather than rise in tone at
their end.

For example, take any Volkswagen ad. Count the number of

nouns per sentence, and compare it to the number of adjectives
See how the ad kids itself--never takes itself too seriously No
tice how it makes its point quietly, and them stops. Even how the
extremely short, extremely simple- sentence structure adds to the
reeling of sincerity.

Here is a complete Volkswagen ad. which features one su
periority of the car over competitive models. Could ,,ou have told
the storv as well, ex-en if you used ten times as many words?

You never run out of air
You also won't have am worries about draining or

Hushing the radiator in spring. Then- is no radiator. "

Or hoses.
Or water pump.
Or rust.


S E V E N TH T E C H N I Q UE OE BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CAMOUFLAGE

1 93

And so there are no worries about anti-lreeze in the

fall or cracked blocks in the winter.

If vou feel that vou owe vour Volkswagen engine a
little something special every spring and fall, you can do
this much.

Just run it once around the block and let it air itself out.

This is great copv because of its simplicity and its image and
its sell, all of which interact to give a very powerful argument to
anvone looking for a new car.

Also, I'd suggest that vou study any of the old Claude Hop
kins ads, or John E. Kennedy if'rom the old Lord & Thomas days)
to get the same power of sincerity without the limiting whimsy.
Or the great radio and TV pitches of the Fifties.

There is little advertising being written this way, and its very
raritv makes it even more effective. It will not solve every sell
ing problem, but where it is effective--especialh* in continuous
campaigns--it is very effective indeed.

The second mood vou mav employ to break away from the
"advertising" stereorvpe is what 1 call Deadly Sincerity. This is
the technique of leaning over backwards
to point out the flaxes
in an offer, so that the benefits, when you bring them in, will be
believed that much more deeply.

Since this is not done in ordinary advertising--since ordi
nary copv does not knock its product as well as praise it--it car
ries great emotional impact, especially in highly-competitive fields.
Here is an example, for a book on getting ahead on your
job, which had to run after a hundred books on the same sub
ject had already appeared in the same publication:

TO THE MAN WHO WILL SETTLE FOR NOTHING
LESS THAN THE PRESIDENCY OF HIS FIRM

And who is willing to make the incredible sacrifices

necessary to get there in the shortest possible time.

Here is the most realistic handbook ever written for

vou--and vou alone.


LU4

S E V E N TH T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: CAMOUFLAGE

This is a private advertisement.
It is not meant for ninety-nine men out of everv hun
dred. These men do not have the drive--the impossible
pride--the absolute compulsion to succeed that this ad
vertisement demands . . .

And so on. You can see immediately, in the first few para
graphs of this ad, how the tone of utter frankness is set. The use
of such "non-advertising phraseology" as "incredible sacrifice". . .
"impassible pride". . . "absolute compulsion". . . "this advertise
ment demands" set the ad off from the others around it--give it
an air of unpredictability that induces the reader to go on.

In our next chapter when we discuss Reinforcement, we shall
see how this tone of complete fairness, and even criticism, can
make a comparatively minor claim take on immense emotional
impact. But for now it is sufficient to point out that this is one
more way to break out of the hard-sell stereotype, and gain al
most the same type of believability that would be given to a fac
tual report.


THE FINAL TOUCHES

14

Let's now review what we've done

up to this point, and the last few problems that we have to con
sider.

We started this book with the idea that there was a definite
technique that could produce better headlines than the ones you
were using yesterday. And. since the headline is so vitally im
portant to the success or failure of vour ads, we devoted the first
part of our book to this creative search.

Then, in the second part, we investigated the equally im
portant problem of how to exploit that headline. How to lead the
prospect from the feeding of interest and curiosity that your head
line had aroused in him, into a constantly mounting conviction
that this product has what he wants, and that it is absolutely ca
pable of giving it to him.

You use body copy to accomplish this second objective--
perhaps a lot of it, perhaps very little. In either case, we've
examined the
this effective
three interlocking paths by which
demand is created: first, the intensification of desire; then the
creation of an acceptable product personality- or role with which

195


196

T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

the prospect will want to identify; and then the rather abstract
structure underlying your copy arrangement that produces believability of vour story.

So now we Ye seen how to reach out to your prospects mind
on all three emotional lex-els: Desire . . . Identification . . . and
Belieyabilirv.

Now, as our last problem, we have to put all tliese elements
together. We haxe to take all these promises, these images, these
devices, these structures--and weave them together into one co
hesive unit, that holds your prospect's attention from beginning
to end.

In other words, having broken down the ad to analyze the
elements that make it work--we now have to deal with the re
verse problem: tying it together once again.

We have several additional devices that help us do this. We Ye
already touched on them in passing in previous chapters. Now
let's examine them more closely see what makes them operate.
formalize them into working rules. Like this:

Verification--How to Offer Authorities and Proof

Now, of course, comes the most obvious kind of believability copy. Your proof: your statistics; your tests; vour testimonials:
your authorities; vour trends; vour documentation; vour seals of
approval; your awards won. Any fact at all that vou can use, any
where in the copy, to show that your product does what vou saxit does.

The key words here are anyichere in your copy. Because, as
I hax-e tried to shoxv in the last four chapters, the placement of
your proof is as important to its overall effect as the content itself.

I can't tell you anything about gathering proof that xour oxxn
research department doesn't knoxv a hundred times better. Or, if
you have no research department, that good hard digging won't
give you.

There are no special rules to phrasing proof--except, perhaps,


T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

1 ^'

to keep it as short as possible, as dramatic as possible, as specific

as possible.

And, above all. remember that proof copy, like every other
word in vour ad, is selling copy. It cannot merely offer proof
alone. It must offer the kind of proof that makes the prospect
hungry to read everv word of it. and it must make him want the
product more and more at the end of every line.

Fine. But the next question is: where do you place the proof

in your ad? At what point or points will it be most effective?

And, next, how manv different proofs or tests or testimoni
als or what have vou should you include in the ad? When do you
put them in. and when (if ever' do you leave them out? When
do thev make the ad too heavy? When do they make it dull0
When do thev make it too much to be believed?

We have been discussing these questions, though not in this
context, for the last four chapters. For the last four chapters we
have been discussing the placement and structure of claims, of
promises. We have found that the more you prepare for those
claims, and the more agreeable vou have made your reader to
accepting them, the more powerful they become.

The same exact rules hold for vour proof. Proof--like claims--
is most effective ichen
it, and
when he is reach/ to accept its content as necessary and logical.
This is the rule. As simple and concrete as this. All the rest

the reader unconsciously demands

is application.

We've gone over, quite carefullv, the four processes that de

termine position in vour ad. They are, once again:

1. Gradualization--the development of a stream of accep
tances from vour reader to vour statements, leading finally to an
inevitable demand on the part of that reader for your product.

2. Redefinition--the removal of preconceived objections on
the part of vour prospect toward your product, by providing him
with a new definition of that product.

3. Mechanization--the

proof
works--that it does what vou sav it does.

verbal

that

your

product


198

THK FINAL T O U C H ES

4. Concentration--the verbal proof that other alternate pre

rod

nets do not do this essential function as well.

Now, every one of these processes is effective, not onlv in
increasing the believability of vour claims, but also in increasing
the believabilitv of vour proof.

And, in exactly the same wav, in everv one of these pro
cesses, there is a place for your proof to appear where it will do
twice as much good for your copy as it would aimvhere else.

For example, go back and look at the Concentration copv in
the spark plug ad that we analvzed in Chapter 12. Here was a
point-after-point comparison of the weaknesses of spark plugs
contrasted with similar strengths in fire injectors.

At the end of this sequence, the writer had built up tremen

dous believability. He could have done manv things with that
believability. He could have switched it into an immediate re
statement of his main claims. He could have channeled it di
rectly into asking for the order. He could have gone into a monev
back guarantee, etc.

Instead, he chose to pile proof upon believabilitv in this wav:
"These are some of the reasons that the U.S. Air Force pai/s
their air
supported

injectors

surface

for

for

premium prices
craft . . . ."

And, in so doing, strengthens the power of both the believ
ability copy that went before, and the authoritv-reference that
now follows.

Thus, and we'll take this up in greater detail in the Rein

forcement section that follows, in copy 1 + 1 can often equal 10.
By adding one powerful piece of copv--at preeiselv the right mo
ment--to another, you can get an overall effect far greater than
these two pieces of copy would ever produce, if thev were just
spread out all over the page.

Position increases power. We continue to find new examples

ot this ever\- time we explore another copv process.

And how about the other three processes? How does vour

proof interact with them?


T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

199

Well, take Gradualization. Study the TV Repair Manual ad
again. Notice the exact point that the '"manufacturers test rooms"
are brought into the copy--at the very moment that the reader
is begging for some sort of solution to the problems that the copy
has intensified over and over again.

Here, at this point, the reader is searching for an answer.
Here the exact same proof which might be merely dull statistics
if it were presented earlier, suddenly takes on a sharpened drama--
because the reader now is fully aware of its importance, and is
ready to explore every word.

Again, I must repeat that the main problem with documen
tation is that it is inherently dull. Your job, therefore, is to add
excitement to it. You have to stage it. You have to develop a
drama, in your readers mind, into which your documentation en
ters as the hero. In which statistics suddenly become charged
with emotion--because you've made them the solution to what
ever stands between your reader and the satisfactions that he
craves.

I could go on, and give examples of the interaction of proof
and each of the remaining mechanisms, but I think you would
gain far more bv doing it yourself. Instead, let me sum up by
saying this:

Documentation is any sort of proof--statistics, facts, tests,

etc.--that your product works.

Mechanization on the other hand (in case there may be a
confusion in your mind) is the verbal and logical demonstration,
and thus also proof, that vour product works. Mechanization does
not necessarily have to incorporate any outside documentation at
all to prove its point--it does this on the strength of its logic and
its structure alone.

Verification--which is different from both of them--is the
process of arranging your documentation within your copy so that
it gains the greatest immediate acceptance from your reader, and
has the greatest emotional effect on him.

Thus, I would suggest that you stop thinking of placing your


z uu

T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

documentation only in the headline of vour ad, or in the sub
head, or in a separate box labelled. "Here's Proof."

I would suggest instead that you start thinking of documen
tation as one more element (along with promises, belief-words.
momentum-builders, image-sharpeners, emotion-definers, and all
the rest which we'll explore before we finish) to be interwoven
together, side by side--so that, combined, thev give vou far greater
emotional power and believabilitv than anv one of them could
separately.

Reinforcement--How to Make Two
Claims Do the Work of Four

The first rule of all copy, of course, is that it produce an
emotional impact. As we have seen, over and over again, even in
believabilitv copy, even in documentation, every icord must carry
image, picture,

feeling.

Now. the wonderful thing about emotional writing, of which
copy is one form, is this: That if you employ it skillfully, then the
impact of one emotion, plus the impact of a second emotion, will
often add up--non-mathematically--to
impact of FOUR
emotions.

the

In mathematics, one plus one alwavs equals two--never more.
In emotional writing, one plus one can often equal ten. In other
the right waywords,
two emotional
can often have TEN TIMES
im
ages has hi) itself.

images, joined together

that either of these

impact

the

in

For example, in the classic Avis campaign, the main theme
was "We try harder." Good by itself; but nowhere near as pow
erful as it became when it was reinforced by the reason why Avis
tries harder: "We're only second."

These two separate ideas: (1) We're second; (2) Therefore.
we try harder.--when they are combined, take on a joint impact
far greater than you could ever logically expect if vou simply ex
amined each one of them by itself.

In fact, we can even define one type of creativity as the


T1IK FINAL TOVCHKS

201

ahiliitj to combine separate images into a new uiiiti/ that is much
more powerful than

the mere logical sum of Us parts.

This is how new words are horn. As well as new phrases.

slogans, concepts, ideas. And. ot course, headlines.

Your job--and it's a tough one

is to do just this, image bv

image, throughout the entire !>od\ cop\ ol vonr ad.

For example, in the ad lor "the man who will settle for noth
ing less than the presidency ol his firm'' that we quoted in the
last chapter, this sequence occurs:

This is John Horn's first book, lie is not an accom
plished writer, and it has Haws. II \OII read tor stvle. or for
literarv quality this is not \oiir book.

Bui there are jxirajraphs in liu\ hook--ideas in this
hook--whole chapters i>i this lnuik licit in here nerer seen
put down on paper liejore'
\ud dial mai/ open doors to
(/on--tomorrow--thai olhrru i\< might take a lifetime of
waiting for i/ou to walk through!

Notice how the startling frankness of the first paragraph,
which goes out of its wav to call the reader's attention to flaws
in its product, serves as an intensifying contrast to the positive
claims of the second paragraph- -making them far more believ
able and therefore far more powerful to the reader who is now
convinced that he is receiving a fair report on this book.

It is the juxtaposition ol these two paragraphs--one follow
ing right on top of the other-- that makes their combination so
effective.

Copvwriting. in nianv phases, is the search for such juxta
positions. The last five chapters have been full of examples of
them. I suggest that vou go back and read these examples again,
and underline the combination points--and junctures--where one
claim blends into another, and either sharpens it, pours strength
into it. or makes it more believable.

So. one wav vou tie vour ad together is to constantly build
one claim on top of another-- -alwavs seeking to make each stronger
and more believable bv the combination.


202

T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

This same principle applies in a smaller way in our next

device.

Interweaving--How to Blend Emotion, Image and
Logic Into the Same Sentence

Let me mention at this point a thought that has probably

occurred to you several times over the past few chapters:

The big trouble with analysis of the kind we've been doing
in the second part of this book is that after a while it begins to
sound quite mechanical. You've probably thought that I'm sug
gesting that you abandon any kind of creative flow, and work like
a sort of phrase-carpenter. Here you put in a promise; there vou
nail on a believability sentence; then cover both of them with a
good strong identification.

This is what it sounds like because it takes so long to iden
tify each one of these devices and show vou how to work them.
Because of this need for analysis--which always requires that vou
cut individual elements out of the "life-flow" of a growing ad--
it sounds like you should actually be conscious of each device as
you are using it to write that ad--even going so far as to name
the device as vou weave it in.

I don't think I have to tell you that this mechanical approach
is not my idea, and that it won't work. What I'm trying to do is
exactly the same procedure that a golf pro uses when he wants
to improve your game. He doesn't just let you go out and plav.
He stops you, makes you notice your hands, rationalize your grip.
shift your fingers, get used to the new feel of the club as you lift
it this new way, and then take a few practice swings--all at the
same time that he's telling you why you're doing it this way.

When you're swinging for the first few times, this new wav.
you feel pretty awkward, and you're conscious of everv muscle
in your arms. That's why he has you keep swinging--through one
bucket. . . two buckets . .. ten buckets of balls.

Pretty soon, though, those arm muscles are going to feel
comfortable in that new swing. And you're going to lose your


T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

203

conscious awareness of them. At that point, what was mechani
cal before becomes intuitive now. But it's a new kind of intu
ition--far more, skillful and effective

than you had before.

This is the kind of intuition I'm trying to build in vou. I'm
trying to take you from Creatix itv #1 to Creativity #2. Both are
intuitive states, where you write from
the full depths of vour
emotions as well as your mind, and when1 vou are no more con
scious of the mechanisms and devices that vou are employing to
gain your effects, than you are of the movements of vour fingers
on the typewriter kevs.

But, to get you from State #1 to State #2. 1 have to bring
all these details to consciousness--and make vou awkward in a
new and more effective wav than vou were when vou first learned
to write copy--so that you can take these insights and techniques
and bury them inside your own
talent--so that vou can auto
matically employ them, without thinking about them at all. when
vou want to express most powerfully vour ideas, vour emotions
and vour sales philosophy.

This whole process of "New Awkwardness leading to NewAbility" is seen quite clearly in the very simple technique of In
terweaving, which I learned from a brilliant man bv the name of
Walter S. Campbell.

Every copy writer should read Campbell's book, Writing NonFiction (The Writer, Inc., 1961). In the next chapter I'll list other
books you should have. But this is certainly one of the impor
tant ones that you can probably master in a weekend.

Campbell is talking about reporting and not copy writing,
but the structural principles are the same. He savs that even
in the most factual reporting, no sentence can be effective if it
It must also contain emotion,
contains only
evaluation, impact--if those facts are to be given meaning and
importance to the reader.

the facts alone.

The same is true for every sentence you write of copy. That

sentence should contain not only promise . . . not only image
not only logic--but as much of all three as possible.


2 04

THE FINAL TOl'CIII>

Weave together your promise, vour logic, vonr emotion, vour
image. Pack vour sentences full of every one of them. Make them
blend into each other, till its almost impossible to pull out the
individual threads of the rich pattern of conviction and desire
vou're weaving.

For example, go back to the fire injector ad in Chapter 12.

and see how promise is interwoven in e v en sentence of the believabilitv copy where the injectors are being contrasted with the
old-fashioned plugs. In these two sentences, for instance:

"With ordinary spark plugs you are using, or should he using
premium gas (disadvantage) which costs from 4 to 8 cents more
than ordinary gas (disadvantage), and despite this (disadvantage
you're getting inefficient (disadvantage), wasteful (disadvantage1
gas consumption (disadvantage)."

Ill this first sentence, which is part of a logical sequence of
fered as proof of superiority through comparison of performance
characteristics,
insert six
the copv writer has managed
disadvantage-images for the reader to remember the next time
he considers buying ordinary plugs.

to

Now the copv writer goes on to his contrasting sentence

about the injectors:

fire

"Willi

injectors regular gas (promise) will give

i/ou up
to 8 miles more per gallon (promise), up to 31 more horsepower
(promise), plus easier starting (promise) in all weather (prom
ise)."

Five promises in this second sentence. The packing in of

image upon image to build an overwhelming effect.

Or, as an even more complicated example, involving the in
terweaving of almost everv copv element in the book, let's look
at this sentence:

"And, most important, (a mood-builder, indicating the value
to the reader of the promises which are about to follow) these
experts (reference to authority to build believabilitv) liave dis
the use of the scientific
through
covered (more believabilitv
idiom) that i/ou do not have to he a handyman (the core-promise1


T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

2()o

or « mcc/wmr (restatement of the core-promise)
coax (promise of ease)
all the claims of superior reception that have already been de
tailed in the previous copy) out of i/our set."

in order to
(promise, condensing

this performance

Now, is this done consciously1/Not at all. But the copy writer
knew the principle of i n t e r n et in-r . . . |1U(I experimented with it
before . . . and had it stored axvax in Ins unconscious as one more
tool to be used--intuitiyely-to urain the effect he wanted, at the
exact moment he needed it.

Try it yourself. See how mam different emotions you can
pack into a single sentence . . . paragraph . . . sequence. See how
much richer and more powerful xour cop\ becomes. How much
more you can say in the same space. H.m xou be-m to build re
inforcement-multiplied
i m p a c t - i n to more and more of your
copy

S e n s i t i v i t y - H ow to Give Your Reader What He D e m a n ds

Step In Step Throughout the Copy

Now; if you continue to pile promise upon promise, identifi
cation upon identification, documentation upon documentation el
ement upon element, where do you stop, Where does it become
the reader become satiated or bored and
too much? Where does
want to go on to a new image or new promise, or even the close?
At what point are you starting to oversell? How do uou catch

yourself, and switch off?

We have already touched on this problem before

in Chap
ter 11. I suggest that vou reread that discussion now. even though
we re going to expand on it at this point.

Here you are reiving on your own powers of empathy You
must be, at the same time, not only the writer of your ad but
its reader. You must anticipate that point in the copy flow--as
it
is transformed into a series of impressions in your readers m i n dwhere he is going to sax-: "I've read enough about this. Give me
this instead."


2 06

T HE FINAL TOUCHED

And then vou must shift the direction of the copv to meet

his new direction of interest.

In other words, what we are talking about now is the over
all structure of your ad. Not a sentence, or a paragraph, or a se
quence: but the architecture of the ad as a ichole.

Every ad has an architecture, as I'm sure YOU know. This is
the over-all pattern of the ad, including when and where and how
mam- times you shift from one t \ pe of copy to another. It is the
ability to recognize these shift points, and to change when YOU
encounter them from--sa\---promise copy to mechanism copy to
documentation copy to promise copy again, that makes vour ad
stick together, or fall apart.

This is an almost impossible skill to communicate, since it
relies so much on the feel of each individual situation. However.
I can show it to YOU after it's occurred, in a series of four ads
on the same general type of product--books--and how each dif
fers from the others in the way large blocks of copy elements are
blended in and out of the oyer-all sell.

As IYe said before, I use mail order as m\ example because
mail order is the longest general form of copy, because it usu
ally sells the hardest, and because the techniques I'm talking
about are usually outlined most clearly in this type of copy.

Let's look at our four ads, and see how each approaches the
basic task of selling a similar product in a different way and with
a different blend of elements:

Sample Ad #1

This is the friend-winning ad we looked at in our last chap
ter. IYe indicated each major block of copy, in sequence, by a
letter of the alphabet; and each of the shift points b\- a number.
I am using as examples all direct-promise headlines. The
promise in this headline is almost universal (A): that vou can
make anybody like YOU. (See page 208.)

Instead of intensifying the promise immediately, however, as


T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

207

many other ads in this category have done, this copv starts out
by restating the original headline promise (making anybody like
you becomes popularity) and by defining the previously unrec
ognized fact that this popularity can be taught. (B).

redefinition

the dozens of similar

Why was this done? For two reasons: (1) because this novel,
almost paradoxical
iCan popularity be purchased?)
established an immediate point of difference between this book
and
titles
always a critical problem. And (2> because this ad's subject was
a teacher, and the ad's whole believabilitv rested upon the fact
that so many large and respected corporations had paid this
these techniques to their em
man so much money to reach
ployees.

that had come before

it

This is established by the ads first shift point and first tran

sitional sentence (1). This has hern proved by . , . leads directlv
(.'•. in which the corporations
into the first documentation block
are named.

Thus we have the developing pattern of the ad as:
Promise
Definition
Documentation . . .
Right up to the next transition sentence (2), which brings in
the first detailed promise block iD). and which then echoes again
the documentation (E) and price comparison.

Now, after a brief transitional promise (F), the ad defines
again the importance of the over-all promise (G), backs it up
with a third restatement of the documentation (H), and then
states directly the price comparison and monev-back guaran
tee (I).

Then, with the classic transition (3), it goes on to devote the
rest of the ad to a detailed cataloguing of the promise (f). A
recitation of promises that are far stronger now--because of the
preparation of definition and documentation that has been laid
for them, than they would have ever been had thev simply been
put at the beginning of the ad without such preparation.


IO

T he B o ok T h at T o ok
F o r ty Y e a rs to W r i te

in the entire United States, only one man
teaches these techniques. His name is Paul
P. Parker, L.L.D. He has concentrated his
1 entire lifetime in one fietd--discovering the
best methods of winning people over to your
way of thinking, without anugomring them.
Or. Parker believes that that* methods are

How to Reach People
Who Really Count
How to present your ideas to superiors in a

way that automatically wins acceptance.

How to overcome favoritism.
How to handle objections. Stop people from
saying no. Make it eaty for them to say y e s.
How lo make a compliment twice as elfec-

1

{

It

I» estimated that Dr
been paid over a million do
the executives of such out
porations as National Cash
Sears, Roebuck & Co., The
& Pacific Tea Co., North Am
tion, Inc., General Motors C
Kodak Co., Crane Co.. DuPo
tal Bakeries, General Mills
Co., Borden Dairies, CocaCo., StAndnrd Oil fA, Gor



210

T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

Incidentalh', notice how the negative promises (K), and the
full list of documentation (L), have been placed out of the main
stream of the ad where they can be read, or not read, by those
that are interested in them.

Sample Ad #2

An ad for a book on improving the power of vour mind.
Again the promise-headline (A), intensified by--this time--an
elaboration of this promise (B). (See page 212.)

Now, using its first transitional sentence (1), the ad moves
into two paragraphs of negative (C) and positive (D) redefinition.
And then, with a single transition-word {Simph/--2), again elab
orates the promise, making it stronger and stronger and more
and more detailed, and at the same time giving it the believabilitvtone of definition.

This definition-tone is unchanged throughout (F), where
promise is again interwoven with fact, leading immediately into
a transition (3) in which the tone is that of proof, but the con
tent is straight promise (G).

Then this proof is connected (4) with the entire promise

catalog (H) which fills the rest of the ad.

This ad--enormously successful--is one of the best examples
of interweaving we have. There is so subtle a blending here of
definition, documentation and promise, that everv word of the
copy soon takes on the aura of pure fact.

Sample Ad #3

Now we move on to the straight-promise ad. This is the
rock-em, sock-em type, dominated by promise and mechanismpromise, which gains its power from the sheer momentum and
relentlessness of its claims. (See page 216.)

It again starts with the over-all promise (A), which it im

mediately follows up with a second, elaborating promise (B).


T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

211

Then it moves directly into its fundamental definition (C),
which it equates in a' single phrase (then t/oti could--I) with a
greatly detailed promise (D), and then follows up with a beauti
fully condensed paragraph which consists of a transition in (2) to
a restatement of its fundamental redefinition (E). and out again
(3) to the remainder of the ad. (F>. which is sheer promise and
promise-mechanism from then on.

Here, documentation is disregarded entirely. The full weight

of the sale depends on the power and momentum of the promisetrain.

Sample Ad #4

And finally, we have a beauty book. Here, the main promiseheadline (B) is preceded by the critical authority-reference (A)
which: first, sets it apart from the other similar products it must
erase from the prospects mind: and second, brings in immedi
ately the key persuader of its author. (See page 220.)

(C) block, while promise copy, also serves the simultaneous
purpose of being a momentum-builder--a technique we will dis
cuss in a moment.

Using the different type faces and sizes as transitional ele
ments, the copy then introduces its crucial concentration copy
(D), in which it redefines what the woman can now expect from
her appearance, and in which it outdates other approaches to giv
ing this fulfillment to her.

After

block.

(1) Because... comes

the

first promise-elaboration

But there is no piling up of claim upon claim here. There is
too much ingrained skepticism in this prospect--too much aware
ness of other, previous claims that have disappointed her in the
past. This skepticism must be anticipated, and answered. This is
done, first (F) by agreeing with it, and then (G) bv shifting the
entire story onto the doctor for twelve paragraphs--bv far the
longest reference to authority of any of our four sample ads.



213


214

T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

Then a transition (2) back to promise (H), which fills out

the rest of the ad.

See How the Structure Differs

Let me say this. Although I have not pointed out everv tran
sition, nor everv blending of different tvpes of copv, I have, 1
hope, given you enough material to see clearlv how ads differ in
overall structure, as they differ in content, as the demands of
their material differ.

They range from the simplest promise-elaboration (example

3), to the most subtle blending of all the various elements of de
sire, image, proof, definition and what have vou (example 2), to
the most complicated promise-and-proof. . . promise-and-proof
reinforcement (example 4).

Each problem demands a different structure. Each signals.
as you write it, that here--at this precise point--your copy has
left your reader. You have gone on straight when lie wants to
turn left. You are piling on promise after promise, when lie no
longer believes you. You are burving him under a sea of statis
tics, when he is convinced you are telling the truth, and wants
you to make those delicious promises all over again.

This is what you feel when you are writing the ad. Probablv
a kind of irritating confusion. A blockage. A sense that the copv
has suddenly gone dead, and all you are writing now is words.

So you stop, and think, and look for a new direction. I hope.
in this section, that I have given you a faint indication of what
some of these directions might be.

What, on the other hand, can vou learn from analvzing the
structure of your ads (or other writers') after vou have finished
them?

Primarily--what kind of ad you have written.

Is it straight
promise? Too much documentation? Too little definition of the
new world of possibilities vour product has created?

Does it still sound too much like evervone else's copv. Or


T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

215

product? Could you put another brand-name on it, and not make
any difference?

Have you left anything out? Will this bare promise earrv the
sale? Or could you increase its impact bv paving its wav with
some mechanism or believabilitv copv? How about a proof sec
tion? A use photo? A fuller description of the wav it works?

Mind you, this is not content alone that ice are discussing.
If you take the same content, and give it a new structure, you
are going to create a new ad. Trv it. See for yourself. If vou're
stuck sometime, throw awav vour headline, throw awav vour rough
copy flow, and start off again ISO degrees away from where you
started before.

I want to repeat this again: A new structure is a new ad. It
brings out new ideas. Gives vour promises new sharpness, new
flavor, new believabilitv and even begins to create whole new sec
tions that you never dreamed were there in the product before.
So we've come full circle. You start vour ad bv creating your
headline. You develop your copv storv from that headline. But if
the copv story doesn't develop--if vou gradually find that the
headline isn't really that good after all--then perhaps the very
elements that are begging to come out of your 6-point type should
be at the top of your ad.

This is what makes this copv writing so interesting. You're
always being surprised--with ideas from the most ungodly places.
Just make sure you've got vour eves open wide enough to catch
all of them.

Momentum--How to Draw Your Reader Deeper and
Deeper Into Your Copy

There are two other devices we should discuss. Both of them
help tie your ad together, though that's not their primary function.
The first is Momentum. How to draw your reader into vour
copy . . . keep him reading . . . making sure he doesn't quit vou in
the middle.




218

T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

Copy's first job, of course, is to be read. If its not read, it
can't sell. And if you take some time to make your points--to in
tensify your desire, to build and rebuild vour believability, to re
inforce one claim with another--then you'd better make darn
sure that you've put plentv of momentum-builders into vour copv

There are two types:
1. Actual momentum phrases; and

2. Incomplete statements, or teasers, that draw the reader

further into the copy in order to complete them.

The first type, the momentum-phrases, are time-honored.
They are used in almost any sort of persuasive or educational
writing. You insert them in your copy primarily in your transitionsentences,
to indicate to vour
reader the general type of material that's going to follow. They
are "addy," but they work. Here are a few examples, taken from
the four book ads we looked at in the last section:

to keep interest from flagging,

"They paid up to $22.50 a person to learn priceless

techniques like these:"

"You can learn them all, in your own home next week

end, without risking a penny. Here's how"

"Here is the information you will find in this hook."

"Let me explain."

"All I ask from you is this."

"What you are going to do, in the very first hour that

you receive the book, is this."

"And yet it's only the beginning."

"THEN put this simple trick to work for uou--that

VERY SAME HOUR"

"For example--"

"Read the thrilling answer below."

". • . to start with . . ."

"Just wait till you try this."


THE FINAL TOUCHES

2 19

And so on. These are actual invitations to read on. H YOU

write long copv, thev should be spotted throughout it.

The second category of momentum-builder is much more
subtle, and giyes YOU thousands of waYs to keep drawing vour
reader along after vour developing thought.
It's based on the
simple principle that if YOU make a statement that interests vour
reader, and if vou purposelv and skillinllv do not complete that
statement, so that there is a question of how it can be done, then
he will read on to find out more.

In other words, YOU are continuallv throughout the copv:
1. Creating interest in a specific point;
2. Raising a question in his mind about that point; and
3. Implying an answer to that question later in the copv.
Here are some examples of this technique:

"And YOU will do it often using nothing more than ordinarv tap water, vour own ten fingers, and the contents
of vour garden and vour refrigerator."

"But now. when vou turn on the ignition, a modem
miracle of engineering science comes to life underneath your
hood!"

"Yes! Here at last is the Engineering Miracle vou Ye
been hearing rumors about for months. The fantastic PowerBooster that Continental millionaires use to soup up the
performance of .812,000 cars! The revolutionarv new GasSaver that actuallv gives compact-car economv to Fords.
Chevrolets, Plvmoutbs and dozens of other American cars
now driving in Europe! The sixtv-second attachment that
HAD TO BE BANNED from the great European race
ways--because it gave so much added power, so much
added efficiency to any car that used it--that the officials
were forced to rule that it gave these cars an UNFAIR AD
VANTAGE over those drivers who couldn't obtain it!"

"How to Grow Thousands of Flowers--Without Dirty

ing Your Hands."

"Here it is at last. Authoritative medical proof that
men in their forties and fifties and sixties can enjov a sex


220



9 99

T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

life in many ways as satisfying as when thev were in their
twenties--if they are only shown how to combat the hid
den forces within their minds and bodies that literally drive
them into impotent!/!"

"Caught! 120 Fish in One Hour!"

"Just picture the scene as these college horticulturists
began this amazing flowering test of roses. For here gath
ered in a test field were all the highly-prized queens of
rosedom . . . rose blends that today sell for as high as 83.75
for a single plant. Row upon row of roses . . . prize-winners
in international competition . . . the best the world has to
offer . . . AND THEN, NEARLY-WILD STARTED TO
BLOOM!"

And so on. The objective here is to keep lite reader going--
for one more sentence, one more paragraph, one more sequence.
Notice, of course, that every one of these examples not only pro
duces momentum, not only raises questions in the reader's mind
that he virtually must read on to answer--but is also, at exactly
the same time, loaded with sell. Again, interweaving--making
the ad accomplish two objectives. No waste
each element in
words.

M o o d -- H ow to Pack Your Copy With Drama, Excitement,
Sincerity or Any Other Emotion You Wish

Now we come to the matter of words--and the color which

words create.

I have given you dozens of different examples in this book
of selling copy. All these examples had certain elements in com
mon--they were strong, successful, convincing and so on. But,
at the same time, each of these copy blocks differed from the
others in one immediately apparent way--in the mood that each
set, simply by the rhythm and words that the copy writer used
to express his thoughts.

Words and rhythms. They are to the copy writer what line


T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

223

and color are to the painter. They set the mood of your story--
carry the emotion so subtly that vour reader never really realizes
where the excitement or the image or the conviction is actually
coming from.

For example, here are several of the passages we've looked
at before. Now let's italicize the mood-builders within them, that
make each so different from the others:

Objective:

to emphasize color, beauty, excitement, visual

image:

And when that third precious ingredient reaches those
buds--then that very morning vou will open the door to
vour house--AND YOU WILL BE BLINDED BY THE
EXPLOSION OF COLOR THAT GREETS YOU IN YOUR
GARDEN! . . . You will see rose bushes weighted down bymasses of blossoms, of a richness and perfume and color
you have never imagined before! You will walk past solid,
blazing rows of chrysanthemums so thick that you can't
even see a leaf in between. . . .

Notice that you don't even distinguish many of the separate
images until they are called to vour attention. Notice also that
some of the words are primarily visual image-sharpeners (weighted
down . . . solid, blazing rows . . . so thick you can't even see a leaf
in between). While others convey, not image, but emotion (pre
cious . . . that very morning . . . blinded . . . greets . . . you never
imagined before).

These words are emotion-definers. They tell the reader what
to feel about the images and ideas you are presenting to him.
Their very essence is that they are so subtle that he does not see
them . . . that thev do not call attention to themselves, but simply
flavor and evaluate the images your copy is forming in his mind.
Certain classes of readers will notice these emotion definers.
When they do, your copy becomes either questionable or corny to
them, and vou have lost them. Therefore, vou have to know always whom you are writing for. What their level of sophistication
is--in tone as well as product-awareness. And vou may have to


^Z4

T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

change your tone when you take the same ad from one class of
media to another--down as well as up.

Of course, when everybody sees vour emotion words, then

you've got a bad ad, and you'd better rewrite, fast.

And don't forget the rhythms. Read the ad out loud. See
how you can almost scan it, as though it were close to blankverse. This richness of rhythm parallels the richness of image--
helps build the excitement and sensuousness of the mood.

Now let's look at another piece of pounding copv, and see
how words and rhvthms add to the power and momentum that
are put behind its staccato stream of claims:

"This letter says that if you could onlv liberate the
exact same talent and intelligence and abilitv that vou have
tied up inside you today--then you could:

"read anything you wish, twice as fast as vou can read

it t o d a y . . ."

"absorb facts like a sponge, and repeat them almost

word for word years later . . .

"flash through math, business, financial problems that

have you stopped cold todav. . .

"hold people spellbound with the power of vour speech

and your written word . . .

"out-think others when you have to. tower over them
in judgement, outshine them completely in imagination . . ."

Here again, there are two types of emotion-definers. The
power words (liberate . . . hold spellbound . . . out-think . . . tower
over . . . outshine completely), which build a subconscious current
of potency that permeates each individual claim as it occurs in
the copy. And the frankness, man-to-man, lets-let-our-hair-down
tone-builders (this letter says . . . tied up inside vou . . . like a
sponge . . . stopped cold) that say silently that there's no nonsense
here, no high-faluting phrases--just common-sense which can be
absorbed bv anvone.

And, of course,

the machine-gun rhvthm. Short, choppy
sentences. Verb . . . verb . . . verb. Claim . . . claim . . . claim. Pro-


T HE FINAL T O U C H ES

225

pelling the reader through the copy. Piling promise upon prom
ise, image upon image in an attempt to overwhelm him.

Notice especially the vast difference between these two
highly-successful pieces of copy. Their vocabulary, the type of
emotions they strive to arouse, the images they use, the models
of speech they borrow, the length of sentence and paragraph, the
ratio of adjectives to nouns and verbs, etc.

We could go on, of course. Go back to the Volkswagen copy,
and see how the emotional tone of sincerity is conveyed by the
absence of adjectives, in all the places you'd ordinarily expect to
find them. As well as whimsey. a continuous self-kidding, which
builds, first, a sort of corporate affection, and then trust.

Try the fire injector ad again. Notice how the long, rather
clumsv sentences give a feeling of ingenuousness and reason to
the copy Try to read them out loud. You can't. They don't scan;
they have no definable rlrythm: they don't look like a "copy writer"
wrote them at all. And, of course, there is the same straightfrom-the-shoulder phraseology, to reinforce this feeling of hon
est appraisal.

All this, I repeat, is done unconsciously. You do not see it
unless vou look for it. And sometimes you have to dig very deep
indeed to get every piece of it.

Mood-building is deliberate on the part of the copywriter--
unnoticed on the part of his reader. As with so much of the
rest of the ad, it lies underneath the surface, to do its work
imperceptibly.


EPILOGUE
A COPY WRITER'S
LIBRARY

I have now given you what I've
learned about writing copy. It has taken many years to learn it--
three more to set it down to my own satisfaction. I hope it will
help vou in the onlv way that really counts: to do a better job
and make a little more money.

There are, of course, manv many men in this industry who
know far more about these techniques, and who can produce far
better copy than I. Mv excuse for writing this book is that they
don't seem to have included--at least to my present knowledge--
manv of the specific techniques which I've discussed with you
here.

Some of them' have written books on the subject--great
books--and I'd like to list them here for you. I think you should
buy and read, every one of them, and then thumb through them
again everv year or so, just to catch what you may have forgotten.

Here they are:
Indispensable, of course, is Julian Watkins' great anthology:

The 100 Greatest Advertisements, Moore Publishing, 1949.

227


228

E P I L O G UE --A COPY W R I T E RS LIBRARY

Claude Hopkins wrote a great book, My Life in Advertising,
Harper, 1927. Make them dig it up for you. And see if vou can't
get some of the old Hopkins ads.

John E. Kennedy (not F.) wrote a little pamphlet manv years
ago called Intensive Advertising, which has just been republished
by Printer's Ink. Get it. It'll be the most profitable evening's read
ing you've ever done.

J. K. Lasker, who worked with both these great writers, never
wrote anything himself. But he did give a series of talks before
his staff one week, and Printers Ink has again captured them.
They're called The Lasker Story.

Robert Collier's Letter Book is published bv Prentice-Hall.

It's a gold mine.

David Ogilw wrote Confessions of an Advertising Man, which
you can buv as a paperback. Charming and wonderfully prof
itable.

Rosser Reeves' very short book, Reality in Advertising, is
published by Knopf, and must be read several times before vou
get everything out of it vou should.

Milton Biow's book, Butting In, is marvelous in the first half,

repetitive in the second.

And don't forget Campbell's book, Writing Non-Fiction. Or
those by Caples. Young, Glim and Bedell. Or the motivation re
search books bv Dichter and Martineau. Or the great book on
layout, Visual Persuasion, bv Baker.

Then there are the books on American society' todav--bv
Mills, Riesman, Fromm, Kardiner and all the rest. And the ar
ticles on the emerging trends in the media. And the media them
selves. And of course--your primarv source--the ads themselves.
Keep reading. Keep analvzing. Keep writing. Keep looking
for the new idea--the million dollars hidden somewhere in that
typewriter of yours. Always shoot for the moon--it's one of the
few real thrills left today!

