 ST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

day, but over a span of weeks and months. Here vou extend vour
reader's vision further and further into time--showing him a con
tinuous flow of benefits. This passage is taken from an ad for an
English plant food:

. . . First, the amazing English pellets give vour plants
a tremendous new burst of growth! New plants and old--
they send out dozens of hidden shoots and buds! Some of
your plants may actually DOUBLE in height and breadth
the verv first month!

But this is just the beginning! Within one or two short
weeks--without your even touching vour plant--this amaz
ing pellet AUTOMATICALLY begins the second stage of
its work! It automatically sends out a second wonder-working
nutrient--that enters into even cell of vour plants' bod
ies--that fills those cells with health and strength and sturdiness . . . Great, tall stems stand up with militarv precision!
Giant buds begin to swell with vigor and vitalitv! Even tired
old shrubs and trees--that you had almost given up for
lost--begin to straighten out--fatten up--send out the voung
green growth that you had never hoped to see again!

And then, the most remarkable part of all! Just as
these fantastically beautiful plants have reached their full,
glorious height and strength--at that moment these tinv
English pellets automatically liberate still a third wonder
working ingredient!. . . .

And when that third precious ingredient reaches those
buds--then that verv morning vou will open the door to
vour house--AND YOU WILL BE BLINDED BY THE
EXPLOSION OF COLOR THAT GREETS YOU
IN
YOUR GARDEN! . . . You will see rose bushes weighted
down with masses of blossoms, of a richness and perfume
and color you have never imagined before! You will see
dahlias and asters and gladiolas so massive, so exquisite, so
breath-takingly beautiful that you can hardlv believe that
they are the same plants that you put in the ground! And
when your neighbors begin to pour into your vard--when
you watch them bend and touch these flowers to see if
they are real--THEN YOU WILL KNOW A FEELING
OF GARDEN ACCOMPLISHMENT AND PRIDE THAT
YOU NEVER DREAMED OF BEFORE!. . . .


FIRST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I N T E N S I F I C A T I ON

89

Bring In an Audience

6. At the end of this passage, other actors besides the reader
the scene. Each one of them--each group of
fresh
your
the product.
their eyes--experi
reactions--the product perfor
their actions and

into
are brought
them--provides
a
reader can view
enced
mances become new, vivid and completely different again.

new perspective
Seen

through which

through

through

These new participants mav be celebrities, who relate their
experiences through the testimonial. This technique is too famil
iar to warrant an example here. Or they may be average men
and women, whom the reader easily identifies with, whose ex
periences are related through narration or the case history. Prob
ably the most famous example of a narration is the "They Laughed
When I Sat Down at the Piano" ad quoted in the first section of
this book. Here, as an example of the case-history approach, we
use a passage from a reducing ad:

. . . And then, if vou were like the men and women
whose fantastic case histories were reported by leading med
ical journals, perhaps vou went to vour doctor and asked
him for AN EASY WAY OUT--WITHOUT TORTURE--
AND WITHOUT SLIDING BACK! . . .

These doctors had the answer in a tinv grev pill--and

a common-sense plan . . .

Thev instructed dozens of patients to test this mir
acle plan in their own homes, under these doctors' su
pervision. These men and women did NOT give up the
foods they loved--thev simply and naturally cut down on
them!

Thev were not given anv starvation diets . . . thev re
ported, in case after case, that thev felt more pep. more
energy, more youth and vitality than thev had known for
years!

And then, dav bv day, faster and easier and safer than
they had ever known before, the uglv excess fat around
their bodies melted away! While thev were eating three
delicious meals a dav, thev were shedding as much as five
pounds a week! While thev were feasting on mouth-water-


90

F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

ing steaks, thick juicy slices of roast beef, potatoes, butter
and bread--they were losing inch after inch after inch from
around their waistlines, their thighs, their hips. Clothes that
they had discarded years before began to come out of the
closets and attics. Men and women both--they beam to
notice a new young look to their chins and faces that thev'd
thought thev'd lost forever.

And when the plan was over . . . these men and women
had lost as much as 17 and 25 and even 34 pounds . . . thev
had turned back their weight clock 5. 10 and even 15
years . . . And their trim, slim figures were just beginning. . . .

Show Experts Approving

the product benefits. Experts

7. But not only celebrities and ordinary people can be used
the fcld--profession
to reaffirm
als--the sophisticated,
the blase can be called
on to register their reactions. There is nothing so astounding as
the astonishment of experts. Here the elements of surprise, com
petition and discovery all combine to sharpen the image even
more. This example is taken from the rose ad mentioned above:

the discriminating,

in

rosedom . . . floribundas, hybrid

. . . Just picture the scene as these college horticul
turists began this amazing flowering test of roses. For here
gathered in a test field were all the highh -praised queens
teas, polvanthas,
of
patented roses and rose blends that today sell lor as high
as $3.75 for a single plant. Row upon row of roses . . . prize
winners in international competition . . . the best the world
has to offer. . . AND THEN, NEARLY WILD STARTED
TO BLOOM!

Just picture the astonishment on these experts' faces
when in the first month alone, Nearly Wild produced over
15 times more blossoms than the average of all other roses
combined; how in July alone it produces an average of 50
new roses a day, more than 7 times as many blossoms as
the second leading rose! How in August it produced 21
times more roses than its nearest competitor; and then
went on. . . .


FIRST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

91

Is it anv wonder that a famous rose expert upon view
ing the results of this test, exclaimed: "Why, it's like hav
ing a complete rose garden of 20 plants--all on a single
bush!" Or whv another rose expert, shaking his head in dis
belief, stated: "If we ever released these flowering figures
to the public, they'd never believe it. And if they did be
lieve it, we couldn't produce Nearly Wild rose plants to fill
the demand in the next 25 vears!". . . .

Compare, Contrast, Prove Superiority

8. Each new approach suggests others. The competition can
be carried into contrast. The disadvantages of the old product or
service can he laid side by side with the advantages of the new--
throwing
into sharp relief. Here, as one ex
ample, is a brief, three-sentence passage from a book-club radio
commercial that establishes the difference between random buy
ing and book-club savings indelibly on the listener's mind:

these advantages

. . . Yes! While vour friends were paying $3.95 for their
copies of Frank Yerbv's run-away best seller, The Golden
Hawk, Dollar Book Club members were getting the same
exact book for only 99c • While your friends were paying
$4.95 for John O'Hara's flaming new thriller, A Rage to
Live, Dollar Book Club members were getting the same
exact book for only 99c1. And while your friends were pay
ing $5.95 for Thomas B. Costain's towering new triumph.
High Toicers, Dollar Book Club members were enjoying
exactly the same book--for only 990! • • •

Or, as another example, here is a passage from a direct mail
piece selling a Fuel Reclaimer--a device for the engine of your
car that feeds escaping crankcase gases back into your carburetor:

. . . This device uses the suction-power of your own
motor to scoop up that smoke. And then--in one of the most
brilliant ideas in engineering history--it destroys that smoke


92

FIRST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

by feeding it back into your engine, where it is burned up
again as a continuous, extra flow of fuel!

Think of it! Instead of polluted oil, polluted engine,
polluted air--vou get a constant stream of extra gasoline
flowing into your engine, almost as though vou had a free,
second gas tank connected to vour car!

Instead of one breakdown after another, one more

repair bill after another, each more expensive than before
you get young-car power, young-car economy, voung-car
resistance to repair bills, because the deadlv sludge-causers,
acid-causers, filth-causers that used to ruin vour car, are
now being burned up as fuel in vour engine!. . , .

Picture the Black Side, Too

9. And

to neglect

there's no need

the Heaven-Or-Hell ap
to every promise--the problem
proach. Here
that you are
in
all its full black color. You irritate the wound, and then you apply
the salve that heals

the negative aspect
liberating your prospect from

forever--is painted

it.

Thus you derive two currents of motivation--repulsion away

from the former problem or inadequate product, and the attrac
tion generated by your own product's contrasting solutions.

There are several forms in which vou can present this beforeand-after picture. You can do it through narration or the testi
monial. You can do it by using the "pitch" technique of product
ridicule. Or you can simply present straight description of the
old product or problem, with all its detailed drawbacks, and then
follow it directly with a similar description of vour new solution
in a perfectly parallel style, item by item. Here, as an example,
is a passage from an ad selling a new kind of spark plug:

. . . Someday, if you ever have a spare moment, lift
one of the old-fashioned spark plugs out of vour car! Look
at the bottom of that plug. In 10 seconds, vou'II learn more
about gas waste than any book could teach vou in a vear!
If that plug has been in your car three thousand miles
or more, then what you'll see on the bottom of that plug


FIRST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

93

is FILTH! The Firing Point of that plug--the most im
portant single point in vour car--will be choked, strangled
and fouled with BLACK, FILTHY CARBON! Carbon that
robs vour car of as much as 20 vital horsepower everytime
vour engine fires!

Now, wipe that filth awav and look at the Firing Point
itself. This is the POWER POINT of your car . . . the pinhead of electricitv that turns raw gas into 300 horsepower
of driving energy! And what is the condition of that point?
CORRODED--PITTED--SCARRED---AND
WORN!
Hardlv able to deliver half the spark that it should! Wast
ing gas--wasting monev evervtime vou put vour foot down
on the gas pedal!

Yes! You pay $2,000--83.000--84.000 for your car. And'

a single 99c part robs vou of the real power and enjovment of that car.

AT LAST! A PLUG SO SMART THAT IT THINKS"!
Now look at the new plug--the re\ olutionarv Power
Flash plug that I'll send vou--for exactlv the same price
that you're paving today.

Here is a plug that has not onlv ONE firing point--
but hundreds of potential firing points! That actuallv ELIM
INATES THAT DEADLY CARBON--burns it up--throws
ITSELF SPARKLING CLEAN ON
it awav--KEEPS
EVERY SINGLE STROKE! The full, blazing horsepower
that was there when vour car was brand-new, is still there
as much as 30.000 miles later.

But that's just the beginning! This plug actually gives
vou the full firing power vou need for everv driving con
dition--smooth, dependable power for city stop-and-go
driving--effortless horsepower for the parkway--blazing re
serve power for super speeds. . . .

And that's still just the beginning! Best of all. this is
one of the toughest, strongest, longest-lasting plugs ever
made. You could actuallv pound it against a concrete wall
with a hammer without even denting it--and this amazing
plug would still fire clean and hot with 30,000 miles! Yes!
These fantastic plugs give vou such consistent, long-lasting
service that we can afford to make one of the most amaz
ing guarantees vou have ever heard. . . .


94

F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: I N T E N S I F I C A T I ON

Show H ow Easy It Is to Get These Benefits

10. To repeat again, the variations are limitless. At everv
point that your product touches the life of vour prospect
price,
availability, ease of use, durability, portability replacement and
maintenance, even unwrapping the carton it comes in--it fur
nishes you with another fresh perspective in which to reiterate
and reemphasize its benefits. Here is just one example--stress
ing
dous benefits

the ease of application, and contrasting

that application gives you:

it with

tremen

that

the

. . . One week from today, vou are going down to your
car. You are going to lift up its hood--vou are going to take
the black, shining can we send you--and vou are going to
simply pour its contents into the oil filler pipe of vour car!
that's all the work you will do! That's all the skill vou
need! And yet in that 30 seconds work, vou will improve
that cars performance in eight different wavs!

With just 30 seconds work, you will strengthen the
engine of that car so greatly that you will get 2 to 3 to 5
miles more per gallon from every gallon vou buv. . .

With just 30 seconds work, you will lubricate that en
gine so thoroughly that you will drive up to 5.000 full miles
without even looking at vour oil. . .

And, with just 30 seconds work, you will protect that
engine so completely that you will add up to four years to
its power and life! . .. You will push off the ring and pis
ton jobs that might cost you $75 each--for vears!.

Use Metaphor, Analogy, Imagination

to present

11. Nor do you have to be satisfied merely with the statement
infinite opportunities for the use of imag
of rate fact. There are
in more dramatic form, outside of
ination
the rigidly realistic approach. Some of the more famous examples
are the Alexander Hamilton ad of the Twenties, "The Glory of
the Upward Path." Or the Big Ben alarm clock series, "First he
whispers, then he shouts." Or this passage from perhaps the most

those facts


FIRST TECHNIQUE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION'

95

long-lived ad of them all, the Shenvin Cody English Course, in

which a manual of instruction is personified and given actual

life:

The basic principle of Mr. Cody's new method is
habit-forming. Anyone can learn to write and speak cor
rectly bv constantly using the correct forms. But how is
one to know in each case which is correct? Mr. Cod}' solves
this problem in a simple, unique, sensible way.

100% Self-Correcting Device.
Suppose he himself were standing forever at your
elbow. Every time you mispronounced or misspelled a word,
every time you violated correct grammatical usage, every
time vou used the wrong word to express what you meant,
suppose vou could hear him whisper. "That is wrong, it
should be thus and so." In a short time you would habit
ually use the correct form and the right words in speaking
and writing.

If vou continued to make the same mistakes over and
over again, each time patiently he would tell you what was
right. He would, as it were, be an everlasting mentor be
side vou--a mentor who would not laugh at you, but who
would, on the contrary, support and help you. This 100%
Self-Correcting Device does exactly this thing. It is Mr.
Cody's silent voice behind you, reach' to speak out when
ever vou commit an error. It finds your mistakes and con
centrates on them. You do not need to study anything you
alreadv know. There are no rules to memorize. . . .

Before You're D o n e, Summarize

12. To repeat again, there is an infinite number oi new ap

proaches. No list of them can ever be complete, because new

applications, new perspectives, new viewpoints are being discov

ered every day.

Which of them, and how many of them you will use in a
single ad, is a matter of timing and balance as you begin to put
your ad together. As long as each additional fresh perspective con
tinues to huild the dominant desire in your prospect's mind, use it.


96

F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

But if the additional perspective is not different or dramatic enough
to renew your prospect's interest in your claims, then leave it out.
To a large degree, this is a matter of sensitivity and originality on
your part. The sensitivity comes from intuition and experience; the
originality often comes from nothing more than hard work. And
perhaps the best way to measure the balance between the two--
that critical turning point where reinforcement becomes mere rep
etition--is to re-read your ad, some davs after vou have first writ
ten it.

There are, however,

two conventional summary devices
which are almost always used, and which must be mentioned
here.

The first of these is the "catalog." This is a brief condensed
listing of all
the product's performances, benefits, and/or applica
tions, one after the other, without description, dramatization or
elaboration. Each of the benefits or perspectives which might
have been given three or four paragraphs at the beginning of
your ad, is here summed up in a single line.

There are two types of catalogs. Those that expand desire
horizontally, among ever-enlargening groups of applications or
prospects. And those that expand desire vertically bv deepening
or magnifying that desire.

Here is an example of the first type of catalog--used to list
all the applications of a blow torch kit that might conceivably sell
it to a home owner:

ALL IN ONE!

Blow-Torch, Paint-Remover, Soldering Iron!
Professional-hpe Propane Torch also doubles as fast,
safe Paint Remover and precision Soldering Iron! Does 101
jobs around the house, including--

Laving tile; removing paint or putt}'; thawing frozen
pipes; sweating copper tubing; soldering gutters; repairing
electrical work; starting charcoal fires and fireplaces: burn
ing weeds, parasites and damp leaves; thawing frozen locks;
light brazing; loosening rusty bolts; car body and fender


F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

97

repairs; soldering aluminum, silver and jewelry and other
hobbies, and manv, manv more. . . .

It is quite obvious, of course, that this catalog device uses
the "shotgun approach." Up to this point, vour ad has taken a
single dominant desire, and developed that single desire to the
point of absolute maximum intensity. This willingness to gamble
on being precisely right--on having chosen the one most pow
erful appeal--gives your ad the impact of a high-velocity rifle.
But it also demands the accuracy of an expert marksman.

Now--through this multi-appeal catalog listing--vou have a

last-minute chance to hedge. Now vou "shotgun" with every wideangled appeal, benefit and application in the book. Before vou
were heightening a single desire, bv picturing the satisfaction of
that desire in a dozen different settings.

Now you are building an effect of a different kind--one of
sheer magnitude, of number, of infinite possibilities--in the hope
that any one of them, or the combination of all of them working
together, mav provide the extra added push that closes the sale.
This catalog technique was born in mail order book selling,
and here it has its widest application. This next example is a con
tinuation of the memory book ad we quoted above:

. . . But this is just the beginning of the "miracles" vou
can perform with vour memory. This secret is just one of
the over 50 MEMORY INTENSIFIERS contained in this
b o o k . ..
For

instance--REMEMBERING NAMES AND
FACES! . . . How would vou like to walk into a room of
twenty new people--meet each one of them onlv once--
and then remember their names, automatically, for as long
as vou live . . .

Think of the advantage in business, when vou can call
every customer bv his first name, and then ask for his wife
and children, instantly, by their first names! Think of the
impression you'll make when you ask him about the state
of his business, his hobbies, when vou repeat, almost word
for word, the last conversation vou had with him. Think of


98

F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

becoming the celebrity at your club--as the member who
"knows everyone"--who can be depended on to avoid mis
takes, to win new friends for the organization, to get things
done!

But this is still just the beginning! This book teaches
you to remember exactly what you hear and read! . .. It
teaches you how to memorize a speech or a sales presen
tation. in minutes! It teaches vou how to remember every
card played when you relax at night! . .. It shows vou how
to improve the depth and force and power of vour mind!
How to double your vocabulary--learn dozens of wavs to
burn new words into your memory--learn their meanings
without looking them up--repeat entire phrases, sentences,
paragraphs from the great writers! You'll be able to learn
a foreign language in a few short weeks--at least three to
four times as quickly and easily as vou could without this
system! You'll be able to hear a joke, storv or anecdote onlv
once, and then repeat it in the same hilarious wav!

Yes! And most important of all, this book will show
you how to professionally organize vour mind--do what vou
have to do in half the time! You'll remember dates, ad
dresses, appointments--automatically! You'll carry dozens
of telephone numbers in the file-cabinet of \our mind! . . .
Let me send you this book, and prove these facts to vou
in one short evening, or it doesn't cost vou a penny! . . .

The second use for this catalog technique is to pile desire
upon desire, rather than application upon application. It is again
a building of magnitude, of number--but this time in summary
of all the perspectives that have gone before. This example is taken
from the Fish Lure ad quoted above:

. . . Here's What This Amazing, Self-Propelled Fish

Lure Does For You!

First of all, this Self-Propelled Fish Lure frees vou
forever from the filthy task of digging for worms and
crawlers, catching frogs, or paying 500 to $1 for a bucket
of minnows that die on you before vou can even get them
in the boat! It frees you forever from paving $3, 84 or even
85 for a fancy, "dead-as-a-duck" lure that onlv works when


FIRST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

99

v

vou tow it--that could never actually swim under its own
power behind

vou!

It frees vou forever from long, torturous hours of care
ful work, tving your own flies and lures, because you just
couldn't buy anything, anywhere, that would reach out beond vour farthest casts, and pull in the fish for you!

It means that tomorrow . . . you can go out in fresh or
jalt water . . . and haul in the -eye-poppers with a lure that
s
actuallv drives them into a frenzy with its crippled min
now action and its dying bee sound! It means that you can
weigh down vour boat with bigmouthed bass, small mouthed
bass, cat-fish, dog-fish . . . wherever you drop a line!

It means that you can fish better--novice or p r osound asleep at the bottom of your boat--than most fish
ermen sweating and casting till their arms ache with ordi
nary, "dead-as-a-duck" lures!

And it means that you'll have the time of your life--
not only amazing your friends and family with the hauls
vou drag home behind you--but just watching your fish
erman friends' faces, the first time they see this incredible
SELF-PROPELLED FISH LURE in action! Their eves
will almost pop out of their heads!. . . .

Put Your Guarantee to Work

13. And finally, as you close the sale, as you ask the prospect
for action, as you state the terms of your guarantee, you can turn
last brief sum
that guarantee
mary of your product's performances--reinforced at every
step
by the positive reassertion of that guarantee. Here is an example
from the spark plug ad quoted above:

the climax of your ad--the

into

. . . Guaranteed For Two Full Years!
Yes! You try these amazing POWER FLASH SPARK
PLUGS for two full years entirely at our risk! First, test
them for one full month for surging power, thrilling new
driving performance, breath-taking gas-savings alone! D
uring that very first month alone

1. These plugs must give you up to 9 miles more per

gallon instantly--or your full purchase price back!


100

F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

2. These plugs must give vou up to 31 more horse

power instantly--or your full purchase price back!

3. As an extra added assurance--these plugs must con
tinue to give vou this power, performance and gas savings
FOR TWO FULL YEARS --or we will send vou a brandnew set ABSOLUTELY FREE! . ..

Or, as an even better example of the full impact vou can
gain by using your guarantee as a summarv device, here is the
guarantee passage from the plant food ad quoted above:

. . . These Magic English Pellets . . . cost onlv S2.98 for
a package of 144 pellets . . . Since onlv one or two pellets
are required to treat the average plant, this is an invest
ment of only a few pennies a plant for the most astound
ing beautv vou have ever seen!

And these results are completelv guaranteed! Here is
what we ask you to do, when vou receive vour Magic Pel
lets next week--

USE THEM TO CREATE SUPER-FLOYYERS! Place
one tiny pellet besides each of your hvdrangeas. zinneas . . .
any kind of flower that you want super-blooms! And if vou
don't see fantastic new growth within a few short weeks . . .
ii you don't watch with amazement while handfuls of new
blossoms burst forth from these old plants--then simplv re
turn the emptv package for everv cent of vour monev back!
USE THEM TO CREATE SUPER-VEGETABLES!
And pick huge, breath-taking beauties within a few short
weeks . . . thrill your family with the sweetest, juiciest, tenderest vegetables you've ever known--or everv cent of vour
money back!

YES! USE THEM IN YOUR ENTIRE GARDEN!
Use them on hard-luck plants where vou've almost given
up hope! Use them on the hardest-to-grow house plants
that you know! Yes, even use them in sand, and absolutely
astound your friends! And if you don't agree that this British
invention is a true gardening miracle . .. if vour garden isn't
the showplace of your neighborhood at the end of one short
month--then simply return the empty package--for evencent of vour money back!. . . .


FIRST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

1 01

At the end of vour ad as well as at its beginning--Intensifi
cation--building desire by presenting continually new images of
its satisfaction through your product. The first of the Processes
of Persuasion.

How to Apply These Principles of
Intensification to the Campaign

As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, we have used
predominantly mail order examples to illustrate the mechanism
of Intensification. We have done this for two reasons. First, be
cause mail order customarilv uses long copv and hyperbole; and
it is through the extremes ol this long copv and these superla
tives that we can see these techniques working most clearly.

Secondly, we have used mail order for these examples be
cause mail order says all it has to sav about a product in a single
ad. There are no mail order "campaigns," in the sense of a se
ries of different-though-related advertisements, appearing one
after the other, and based on a common theme. Mail order com
presses such a campaign into a single ad. It savs all it can, every
thing it can think of, in this one ad (which is often laboriously
fitted together out of a series of preliminary ads, each of which
contributes some element to the finished form). And then, when
it has proven itself successful, it is frozen--even to the point of
typography--and run until it has exhausted its potential.

Thus, mail order as a rule contains the greatest number of
these Intensification devices in a single ad; and bv studying these
mail order ads we can see them working against each other, com
plementing each other, reinforcing each other, strengthening the
overall effect as paragraph is piled on paragraph.

But in national advertising, the rules change. While mail
order is a series of introductions of new products, the average
life of which is less than two years, national advertising is con
cerned with products whose life span is far greater, often ap
proaching the entire life span of advertising itself. And while the


WZ

F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

mail order advertisement runs once, and then is not repeated for
three to six months, national advertising must keep its product
image constantly in front of its public, and therefore must run
far more frequently.

Thus, national advertising, by its frequent insertions, soon
loses its immediate novelty. The creative problem in national ad
vertising thus changes from finding the theme for a particular ad
vertisement to finding the theme for a series of advertisements.
And the problem of Intensification shifts from building desire
throughout the advertisement to building desire throughout the
series. And an entirely new problem of balance emerges--that
of keeping continuity throughout the series, hy maintaining the
dominant image sharp enough and identifiable enough to utilize
the desire generated hy past advertisements, and at the same time
varying that image sufficiently to induce the prospect to read it
again, and therefore reinforce and sharpen that desire.

Assuming that you have found your dominant image, vour
creative problem now becomes two-fold. First, to compress that
image into a single statement or picture, so powerful that it will
sell the product the very first time it is used, and so true to the
heart of your market that it will continue to sell that product,
even when it is used over and over again.

It is important to realize that--as the campaign develops--
this dominant image or idea cannot remain as the headline. To
present the same basic headline (or lead picture) time after time
to the same audience would soon make the campaign unreadable
This leads us to your second creative problem. To present a
series of variations or perspectives of that central image--each
emerging from your dominant idea, but each so different from
the rest that they impel your prospect to read through them, and
so fresh that they make that dominant idea seem new again.

Thus you have your Central Campaign Idea, and its contin

uous restatement in a series of fresh disguises

There are as many different ways to use this basic technique
of campaign construction as there are advertising styles. They


F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I N T E N S I F I C A T I ON

103

range from the most blatant and obvious to the most subtle. To
start at the top, in a brief resume of examples, consider the
superbly-effective Colgate campaign of the late 1950s. Here the
centra] idea was openly stated, and precisely repeated, during
every advertisement:

"Gardol--the Invisible Shield that Protects Your Teeth."

The variations consisted of a scries of opening analogies.
Using television as the most sharplv-deflned example, an invisi
ble shield was shown protecting the announcer against baseballs,
footballs, etc.--against which thev would simply bounce off. The
wording of the commercials was ritualistic. Once the initial demon
stration was over, there was no variation in the sentences that
followed:

"Just as this invisible shield (the announcer raps the
shield with his knuckles) protects me against this baseball,
so the invisible shield in Colgate toothpaste protects your
teeth against decay."

Here the variations are confined to the opening demon
stration in the first ten seconds of the commercial. These are
designed to startle the viewer (the ball being thrown directly at
him from within the television set) and this emotional reaction
is carried over to reinforce the rigidlv repeated remainder of the
commercial. Thus vou have a quick and startling emotional in
volvement, welded onto a precise selling message.

Equallv as powerful is the technique of repeating the exact
verbal image throughout a series of advertisements, while vary
ing and freshening the emotional appeal through a spectrum ol
constantly changing main illustrations. Thus the dominant image
is retained intact--continuity is maintained--but there is no feel
ing of over-familiarity or boredom. This technique might be named
"Rule and Example." Two of its most effective uses recently have
been in the hair styling field. First with Toni, where the preciselyrepeated verbal image was:


1 04

FIRST T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

"WHICH TWIN HAS THE TONI--and which has

the $15 permanent?"

Above this unvarying headline was a continuouslv-changing
stream of pretty girls--each new picture making the question new
again, and requiring an interplay of examination between the pic
ture and the copy to discover the answer.

The same technique was used, some vears later, bv Clairol
to sell their hair tint. Here the Rule was expressed in the preeiselvrepeated headline:

"DOES SHE OR DOESN'T SHE0
"Hair-coloring so natural only her hairdresser knows

for sure."

Here again, this headline was re-invigorated bv a series of
main illustrations, of attractive young women, in common but
glamorized every-day activities, enjoying their lives. Here again.
the Examples not only proved the Rule, but renewed it.

At the other extreme, however, the dominant image mav not
even appear in the advertisements themselves, but mav merelv
be the underlying theme for the campaign as a whole. Here the
continuity is retained--not by a precisely-repeated slogan or state
ment--but by a single, rigidly-maintained focal point. This focal
point may be a dominant product appeal--such as the Cadillac
quality7, which is symbolized in every Cadillac advertisement in
the identification background photography, in the typography, in
the copy style, in the fashions and jewelry that are chosen to ap
pear with the car, and the credit lines that are given to them--
even to the highly-stylized pen-and-ink drawings that are used
when the campaign shifts to newspapers.

Or, if it so merits, the focal point may be simply the prod
uct itself. In such a campaign, each succeeding advertisement
reveals another fact about the product. Each is completely differ
ent; no single phrase or slogan is repeated twice. Here trie varia
tions comprise the entire verbal content of the advertisements. But


FIRST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

1 05

their subject-matter, and the illustrations, are alwavs the same--
the product.

Perhaps the best example of this technique is the magnifi
cent Volkswagen magazine campaign. Here the advertisements
are reduced to severe simplicity. There is no background identi
fication whatsoever. Different perspectives of the product are
shown as close-up as possible (except in the "Think Small" ad
vertisement) against an absolutely bare background.

Against this rigid focus on the car itself, to the exclusion of
every other visual element, the series of copv messages presents
a complete exploration of even facet of the car's performance,
utility, economy, durability service facilities and what-have-vou.
Any single advertisement is sufficient to interest a prospective
buyer. Together, especially when concentrated in the same media
and reaching the same audience week after week, the series builds
an overwhelming impression of novelty and value--the theme of
an Honest Car. Here, as examples, are only a few of the dozens
of different headlines:

"THINK SMALL."
(The first in the series, discussing the merits of compactness

as an asset.)

"Lemon."
(Showing what appears to be a perfectly good car, and
discussing the microscopic, almost unnoticeable flaw in it that dis
qualified it.)

"Our new model."
(A car that shows no difference, but has dozens of essential
engineering changes inside the car, where thev won't make pres
ent models obsolete.)

"Why you should open the icindoio before you close the door

of a Volkswagen."

(Discussing the fact that the car is airtight, and the quality

that this fact symbolizes.)

"Our number one salesman."
(The serviceman, of course, hpifying the quality of care


1 06

F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I N T E N S I F I C A T I ON

the VW owner gets, and combatting the conception that for
eign cars give sparse service.)

And so on. A series of building-block advertisements, mak
ing no attempt to tell the complete storv in themselves, relying
on their ability to grasp the prospective buver and carrv him
through a procession of short, sharply focussed sales stories that
combine to give an informed desire of tremendous depth.

Notice, incidentally, that each of these headlines fulfills the
requirements necessary to place it at the top of an ad. Each of
them reaches out and touches the prospect at the point of his
dominant desire (to get more value for his car monev). Each ex
presses the common theme of the campaign (this is an honest
car). And each moves the prospect into the body copy--it gets
him to read the complete, though brief, selling message (The first
second, third and fifth headline do this through presenting the
reader with an apparent contradiction--in the first case, with his
accepted notion of "thinking big," and in the remaining adver
tisements, between the message of the headline and the content
of the photograph above it--thus compelling the reader to go
through the body copy to resolve the contradiction. The fourth
does it In- promising the reader information explaining an un
usual and provocative request).

Notice also that to accomplish this noveltv-within-eontinuitv,
and to grasp the attention of the prospect oxer a series of ad
vertisements, and to move him into the bodv copy where he can
be sold more thoroughly, each of these headlines takes the "Cre
ative Gamble." The product, its trademark, or its performance is
not mentioned in the headline. The copy writer is taking the po
sition that he can only sell adequately with the number of words
allowed him by the body copy. Therefore he is willing to risk his
headline in grasping the attention of his prospect and impelling
him to read on, into the sales message itself, presented in con
vincing detail below. If he fails in his gamble, he has wasted his
page. If he succeeds, he has doubled and tripled the effective
ness of his ad.


8
THE SECOND TECHNIQUE
OF BREAKTHROUGH
COPY: IDENTIFICATION

How to Build a Saleable Personality Into Your Product

The desires, wants, needs and
cravings of mankind that we have just discussed are, above all,
obvious. The hungry man feels the contractions in his stomach:
the sick man feels his pain. The woman who is overweight feels
her embarrassment, her discomfort, her shame. The desire for
satisfaction, or for relief, displays itself openly. It announces both
its wants and its needs. It responds whole-heartedly and imme
diately to mechanisms that achieve its aims.

Therefore, the recognition and magnification of this desire is
the first and most obvious task of copy writing. All the principles
and techniques described in the last chapter were practiced to
perfection by the patent-medicine copy writers of the 1890's. Be
fore the First World War, Claude Hopkins had lifted them out of
patent-medicine and established them in every category of gen
eral advertising. Until 1954, they literally dominated advertising.

107


1 08

SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I ON

But there is another kind of desire that exists in the human
mind--far more subtle, partly unconscious, longing not for satis
faction, but for expression. This second kind of desire is so differ
ent from the first, and operates under such different rules, that
it can justly be described as a second dimension of the human
mind. It ma}- be titled the Longing for Identification. Its rise to
prominence as a buying motive marks the great revolution in
merchandising of our time. Its utilization in copy writing--as an
adjunct to desire-building--constitutes our second Mechanism of
Persuasion . . . that of building the proper Identification into vour
product.

A Personal Note

Let me just inject a personal note here on the names I have
given these Techniques--or processes--I believe you should use
to cumulatively strengthen your copy. As I mention in the In
troduction, I have never heard, or read, a discussion of mam- of
these techniques before. Therefore, they are not part of the com
mon advertising terminology, and in case after case actually have
no names.

^ Because of this fact, I've had to invent names for them. Some
of these names convey their meaning at first glance, such as In
tensification. Other names I've put together out of two or more
ordinary words, such as Gradaalization, to try to convey an idea
that has purposely been left ambiguous when you first encounter
it. And in still other cases, such as the Identification technique
discussed in this chapter, I've used terms you' already know and
stretched their meaning.

Identification here, for example, means more than the cus
tomer's process of identifying with a product personalitv, or even
with a group of prestige users of that product. Here, in this new
context I have given it, it means at the same time the active
process by which the copy writer capitalizes on this need for


SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I ON

109

identification by building its realization through his copv into his
product.

The stress is always, in all these techniques, on the word ac
tive. These are the activities vou must accomplish . . . the pro
cesses vou must utilize . . . the psychological effects vou must
achieve to give your copy the maximum possible strength. It is
this active, deliberate, ongoing process--this building of effects--
that I have tried to convey bv these terms.

The Roles Your Prospect Desires

What, exactly, is this process of Identification? Quite simply,
it is, first of all, the desire of your prospect to act out certain
roles in his life.

It is the desire of your prospect to define himself to the world
around him--to express the qualities within himself that he val
ues, and the positions he has attained.

And how do you utilize this longing for identification when
you write your copy? In two ways: First, bv turning your prod
uct into an instrument for achieving these roles. And second, by
turning that product into an acknowledgement that these roles
have already been achieved.

Every product you work on should offer vour prospect two
separate and distinct reasons for buying it. First, it should offer
him the fulfillment of a physical want or need. This is the satis
faction your product gives him. And second, it should offer him
a particular method of fulfilling that need, that defines him to
the outside world as a particular kind of human being.

This is the role your product offers to vour prospect. It is
the non-functional, super-functional value of that product. And it
is built into that product--not bv engineering--but by merchan
dising alone.

For example, only the poor man today buvs food for its
physical satisfactions alone. The average American today selects


1 10

SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: IDENTIFICATION

his food. Selects foods that he believes are modern, because he
wishes to be up-to-date. Selects foods that are non-fattening, be
cause he wishes to be youthful and slim. Selects foods that come
from every country and reflect every taste on earth, because he
wishes to be cosmopolitan, adventurous and sophisticated.

This man no longer buys food for food alone. He has gained.
or he has been given, a whole new vocabulary of wants. He now
buys, not only objects, but roles. His life becomes devoted to a
quest for acknowledgements--"up-to-date" . . . "youthful"
"slim" . . . "cosmopolitan" . . . "adventurous" . . . and "sophisticated"
in this one instance alone.

And because of this multiplication of wants, this man gives
you hundreds of new ways to focus his attention, to stimulate his
desire, to build up that desire to the point of purchase. Evennew role that he covets--every new longing-for-identification that
he develops--gives you one more mass desire that you can har
ness to your product.

What are these roles? Where do they come from? How do
they operate? How do you put them to work for your product?
First of all--the roles themselves. There are two kinds. There
are roles that define character. And there are roles that express
achievement. Let's glance brieflv at each:

1. Character Roles

Usually expressed by adjectives, or adjectives-turned-nouns.
instance--"progressive" . . . "chic" . . . "charming" . . . "bril
For
liant" . . . "well-read." They are a part of the personality of vour
prospect. They belong to him. His task is to pick out the ones
he values most, and to develop them. And then to turn the spot
light of other people's attention onto them, one after the other.
Attainment of these character roles--masterv of them--is
not enough. Once they have been mastered, thev must then be
acknowledged, valued and admired, or thev are worthless.

Here again, your product can serve your prospect in three


SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I ON

1 11

distinct ways--beyond its physical satisfactions--in this constant
search for self-definition. First, it can help him achieve mastery
of his chosen character roles--such as a book on philosophy, if
he wishes to be thought of as well-read.

Second, it can help simplify condense or speed up this mas

tery--such as a Speed-Reading Course.

And third, and most important, it can serve as a symbol of
that mastery to invoke the acknowledgement or admiration of
his friends--such as a shelf to house both books.

You must realize that every one of these values goes far bevond the physical satisfactions of the products themselves. They
are supra-functional, and therefore add an extra incentive for pur
chase.

The book on philosophy might not have been purchased if
the prospect wished onlv to satisfy his academic curiosity, and
did not also wish to enlighten his friends in conversation. The
Speed-Reading Course might not have been purchased if the
prospect wished only to absorb more information in a shorter pe
riod of time, and did not also wish to use that information to get
ahead in both his business and social life. And certainly the book
shelves would not have been of the same fine quality-, finish and
luxury if the prospect had onlv wished to use them as a store
house, and not also as a showpiece.

At least half of all purchases made today cannot he under
stood in terms of function alone. It would be absurd for a man
to spend $5,000 for a 150-mile-an-hour sports car for functional
reasons, when he onlv uses it to drive to and from work on con
gested, 35-mile-an-hour parkways. His willingness to spend this
money onlv becomes rational when vou take one further fact into
consideration--that this 150-mile-an-hour top speed, this handgear-shift, this fantastic cornering ability all give him as their
owner the role of "sportsman"--and very probably "successful
sportsman" at that.

Every product can benefit from this role-giving power. But
there are many products where this ability of character-reinforce-


1 12

SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OE BREAKTHROUGH COPY: IDENTIFICATION

ment--whether built into that product by design, bv society or
by advertising--far outweighs in sales value the built-in perfor
mance of that product. In such products, it is the role-giving func
tion that sells, and not the performance.

One further fact distinguishing these character roles. Since
they are not created by society but by the prospect himself, and
since they are almost never claimed openly but only hinted at.
implied and prompted, therefore they can never truly be tested
or measured, and they are ambiguous. They are subject to error.
And, more important, they are subject to fantasy.

Great areas of these character roles literally exist in the sub
conscious. They are never given definite words. They are not
stated or discussed, but subtly expressed in symbols and images.
Only rarely does the prospect even define them to himself. And
even more rarely does he test them against the outside world, to
see if they are actually true.

Therefore, your prospect is far more reach to believe in the
character roles you assign to him, than he is to believe in either
your product's performance claims, or the achievement roles it
may offer him. If the character role is flattering, such as "viril
ity," and if it is subtly expressed in a non-verbal image-svmbol,
such as a test pilot smoking a cigarette, than the prospect can
easily persuade himself that the same action, smoking, performed
on the same product, the cigarette, conveys to him at least some
of the implied virility of the genuine possessor--in this case, the
pilot.

There is no direct claim made in the advertisement. No ver
balization to be passed on by the conscious, rational mind. No
test situation called for where the prospect must prove that the
role is valid. Acceptance is easy painless, non-demanding.

This is not true of a performance claim, which must be jus
tified in terms of concrete results to our friends. Nor is it true
of an achievement role, which must stand up to the harsh reality
of our position in everyday life. This superb ease-of-acceptance,
this consolation-without-cost feature of the character role is its


SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I ON

1 13

great ^trgrigth, and the reason why it should be used to supple
ment the verbal claims in every ad.

2. Achievement Roles

These are the status roles . . . class roles . . . position roles that
are created by every society on earth, and offered to the men
and women who can earn them. In a civilization as complex as
ours, there are literally hundreds of them--usually expressed bv
nouns, with the nouns serving as titles.

For example, for men, there are--"Executive" . . . "Home
Owner" . . . "$20,000-a-year-Man" . . . "Five Handicap" . . . "ManOn-His-Way-Up" . . . "Block Chairman" . . . and dozens more, em
bracing every activity of our lives.

For women, the primary achievement role to be won is "Wife,"
and from then on--"Fashion Setter" . . . "Career Woman" . . . "Good
Mother" . . . "Civic Leader" . . . "Power-Behind-the-Throne" . . .
"Patron of the Arts" . . . and on, and on.

The list, for both men and women, is endless. Each of these
roles is an achievement to be won, and held, and--most of all--
displayed.

Here display is vital--because none of these achievements
is obvious. Quite the opposite, they are immaterial and invisi
ble--mere titles, roles, bundles of privilege. They do exist--thev
are real--and once they are gained, thev have great potential to
alter our lives. But that potential must first be translated into
physical symbols of success, for everyone around us to see.

And the easiest and most universally acknowledged symbols
of success in America today are the products we can buy. Prod
ucts that are purchased--not by any stretch of the imagination
for their physical function alone--but for the definition they give
us as their possessors. In America today we are known--not only
by the company we keep--but by the products we own.

The most obvious example is the newly-wed woman. Her
first act in her new role as "Wife" is to receive a physical gift,


1 14

S E C O ND T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: IDENTIFICATION

which has absolutely no function other than to define her--the
wedding ring in which she is married. Weeks before this, she has
literally been shedding closets-full of clothes--clothes that still
fitted her physically, but not socially--in order to replace them
with a new material personality, her trousseau.

Her sheets and linens are new. Her furniture and carpeting
are new. Even the very roof over her head, todav, in our societv.
must be new. Because she is literally a new woman--her new
role has transformed her--and she must express that transfor
mation in everything she owns.

The same principle applies to every aspect of all of our lives.
Every social role that we achieve in life is immediately translated
into those possessions which we believe express that position most
clearly. And as we acquire these possessions throughout our life.
what we are doing is constructing for ourselves a "material per
sonality," that we carry with us wherever we go, and whose func
tion it is to define us, instantly, to whomever we meet.

The "Man-On-His-Way-Up," for example, trades in his Ford
for a Buick, and, when he becomes an "Executive," trades in his
Buick for a Cadillac. The "Career Woman" needs an entirelv
different wardrobe than the one she owned as a "Housewife."
And when the man of the house gets a raise, the house either
grows bigger, or prettier, or more filled with status-definers of
every description--or the house itself is discarded, to be replaced
by one more befitting the new character of its possessor.

How to Put These Longings for Identification
to Work for Your Product

Thus products become more than products. In addition to

their physical functions, they take on new immaterial functions
as status definers. They announce our achievements, define our
role in life, document our success.

All products may benefit from this power to define. But in
particular, when you have a product that does the same job as its


SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: IDENTIFICATION

115

competitors, and is so priced that price is no longer a factor, then
the
the prospect's choice will almost overwhelmingly depend on
difference in role that your product offers him. And it is vour job
to create this role for him in your ad.

The performance of this job--the process of building these
character and achievement roles into vour product, to be used
bv vour prospect--is the process of Identification, our second
mechanism of persuasion.

And just as the wish for this identification by vour prospect
is a special form of desire--the desire, not for satisfaction, but
for recognition--so the method vou use to put it to work for your
product follows exactly the same pattern of discovery and mag
nification that you would use for anv other desire.

First, your job is to discover exactly what kinds of character
and achievement roles vour prospect is readv to identify with
vour product--what kind of roles he will reject for that prod
uct--and which of the accepted roles is the most compelling.
And then you must present those chosen roles in such a wav--
so vividly and so intensely--that the role vou are projecting will
become virtually irresistible.

Once again, it is vour market itself that presents vou with
both your opportunities and vour limitations. And it is vour own
personal skill as a copy writer that determines how effectively
vou side-step those limitations, and how fullv you realize the po
tential of vour opportunities.

First of all--the limitations. Above everything else, of course,
identifica
to certain products.

you cannot force your market to accept an unrealistic
tion. People assign certain characteristics
These characteristics may arise out of the product itself--its struc
ture or performance, its historv, its cost to produce or sell. Or
thev may stem from the role or roles that it plavs in their lives
today--or that similar products play in their lives--or that these
products plav in the lives of other people, whom thev have seen,
heard or read about.

These characteristics may be

true or false, superficial or


1 16

SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I ON

profound, flattering or libelous. But as far as your product is con
cerned, they are as hard as rock--and just as determinative. They
exist. They are facts. They cannot be changed. If vou try to break
through them and establish a contradictory image, vou will learn
that they form the walls of a prison.

But if you decide to build on to them--to use them as a foun
dation for sharper, coordinated images, which may be even broader
and more appealing--then, if necessary, you can turn those ap
parent limitations into the strongest selling points in your ad.

Not every product needs this technique, of course. Speak
ing in terms of identification potential, there are two kinds of
products. One is the product with built-in prestige--the sports
car, the swimming pool, the diamond bracelet. These rare and
expensive products already embody the identification appeals most
Americans want. They actually symbolize these appeals
success,
achievement, adventure, self-indulgence, exclusivity--so unques
tionably that they can be used to weld these same values onto
other products.

But these other products--by far the overwhelming major
ity of the products you will be given to work with--have no such
built-in prestige. It is up to you to create their prestige for them.
And you must do this by building on the characteristics they al
these accepted characteristics as a
ready possess--by using
bridge--between the product. . . the image it already has . . . and
the prestige-filled image that you want to wind up \vith.

We now have all the tools we need to build identification
values for our product. We realize that identification longings
are a separate and immensely powerful form of desire--a de
sire, not for physical satisfaction, but for expression and recog
nition.

These longings for identification are two-fold. We all wish to
express our character, and we all wish to gain recognition for our
accomplishments.

But we cannot do this openly--verbally. We cannot go around
boasting how virile we are, or how rich we are. So we svmbolize


SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I ON

1 17

these prestige claims. We express them in terms ol products--
and we buy products that express them.

As Americans, living in our culture and our century, there
are certain character roles and certain achievement roles that we
value more than others. The most general and compelling of these
are: the wish to be virile or feminine--the wish to be exciting,
unique, fun-filled and adventurous--the wish to be friendly and
well-liked--the wish to be important, influential and correct--
the wish to be modern and up-to-date--and. above all, the wish
to be successful, to make something of our lives.

These are the roles most Americans buv. In some splinter
markets, other, contradictory roles mav apply. But, in the mass,
these are the characteristics that will turn the prospects from one
brand to another.

The Primary Image of Your Product

There is a critical point that separates the process of build
ing identification from the process of building desire, namely, that
the product you are given has its men personality at the moment
you are given it. It has its own characteristics. And these char
acteristics may contradict what most Americans want--or simply
not include them--or simply not include as many of them as you
want.

For example, a cigarette is not, by itself, a symbol of success.
But vou realize that if you could make it a symbol of success, you
could sell many more of them. Nor is a piston ring, by itself, a
svmbol of virility--even though that virility image, if vou could
create it, would sell manv more piston rings. And, though house
hold appliances are not, at first glance, symbols of femininity,
women would buv manv more of them if thev could somehow be
made feminine.

How do you do this? In two steps--the first of which is to
identify the primary image that each of these products already
has in the mind of your prospects. For instance, a cigarette is


1 18

SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: IDENTIFICATION

virile in almost everyone's mind. And a piston ring is precisionmachined and full of mechanical beauty to almost every man.
And household appliances are time-saving, by virtue of tlie ven
functions they perform.

These are the primary images of the products vou are called
on to sell. These are the accepted images that thev alreadv have
in your prospect's mind. Your job now is to use 'these alreadvaccepted images as raw material, as a starting point to construct
new, double, triple and quadruple images, that draw in more of
these most-wanted roles into your product-personality, and mul
tiply its identification appeal.
You do this in two wavs:

First, by changing the intensity of your primary image. Bv
emphasizing and dramatizing that primary image, if it is alreadv
acceptable. Or by toning it down, if it is negative or neutral.

For example,

the male virility naturally associated witli
cigarettes is a definite sales aid, even with women. The sheer
physical act of smoking--of "playing with fire"--of "breathing
fire"--has been for centuries an assertion of manhood and of
daring.

But Marlboro took this image of virilitv- and intensified i tdeepened it--in three ways. First, they presented men who were.
in themselves, virile. Second, they presented these men in situa
tions or occupations that demand virility. And third, thev took the
further "Creative Gamble" of affixing to these men's hands one of
the most primitive symbols of virilitv- known to history--the tattoo.
A single dominant emotion--virilitv---symbolized three ways.
The impact of repetition reinforced through variation. Far more
powerful--far more eye-catching--far more appealing than any
one of these images could have been by itself.

So far, there has been no difference between this technique
and the intensification of desire we discussed previously. Al
though we are speaking here in visual terms, the mechanics are
exactly the same--the intensification of an already-existing emo-


SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I ON

1 19

tion in your prospect, through a series of reinforcing images ex
pressing the fulfillment of that emotion.

With certain, naturally-favored products, this process of in
tensification may be all that is required--though even Marlboro,
as mentioned below, goes beyond it. But--and this point is im
perative--though the process of intensifying desire for your prod
uct ends here, the process of building the proper identification
for your product--of building prestige for that product--only- be
gins here.

For the primary image of vour product may not be favor
able. It may be negative--contradicting the roles most people
want to play. Or it may simply be neutral--a wallflower prod
uct--offering most people no emotional reaction at all.

In both these cases, your first suggestion may be to simply
discard these primary images altogether, and substitute more fa
vorable ones. This has been done in countless advertisements.
And it doesn't work--for a very simple reason. Because people
just won't believe that a product is what it isn't. You cannot con
tradict accepted images or beliefs in advertising. This is not ad
vertising's role. Nor is it really necessary.

In order to overcome these unfavorable images, you simply
incorporate them in a larger, overall image--lower their emo
tional intensity--and use them as readily-accepted bridges to lead
your prospect into far more compelling appeals.

How to Build New Images Into Your Product

This is a single process, but it is made up of two steps. First,
as mentioned above, a change in the intensity of your primaryimage--in this case, subordinating it even though you retain it.
And second, using it as a logical link to bring in any number of
more favorable images.

One of the most striking examples is the Chesterfield ad
of 1926--"Blow Some My Wax"--fully examined in Chapter 3.


1 20

SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: IDENTIFICATION

Here is pure identification advertising--dealing with an unfa
vorable image of two generations' standing--that cigarettes are
a "man's product." Although the objective of the campaign was
to make smoking, and smoking situations, more acceptable to
women, it would have been impossible to do this bv picturing
the woman alone. The idea that women would practice this Mas
culine act in private, or with each other, was inadmissible. There
fore the man must be retained. The accepted image must be
acknowledged.

But he undergoes two vital transformations. First, he is sub
dued. His figure is darkened, almost blended into invisibility with
the background. And his position in the picture--his posture--
the arrangement of his hands and face as the light plavs over
them--all direct the attention of the viewer past the man him
self and into the focal point of the picture, the woman sitting be
side him.

Thus he becomes a mere suggestion of man, leading the
viewer into a far more appealing overall image--that of a hand
some young couple, alone together on a moonlit beach, height
ened emotionally with the carefully-blended-in suggestions of
escape, intimacy, and a sense of shared daring.

Because the primary image is there--because the smoking
is done by the man--the viewer, even a well-brought up woman
of the 1920s, accepts the situation. But this acceptance, once
established, goes far beyond that primary image. This feminine
viewer is also willing to accept the romance of the overall scene--
including its emotional undertones of escape from the conven
tional rules and boundaries, and its feelings of relaxation and
liberty. She is now willing to project herself into this scene.

And in accepting the scene as a whole, she is finally led to
accepting the climactic words, "Blow some mv way," as being a
perfectly natural and acceptable action for her to take, with all
its implications for her conduct in the future.

This, then, is the process of identification--of building pres
tige for your product. To weave favorable social and character


SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY:

IDENTIFICATION

121

images into the personality of your product, in order to reinforce
and even dominate those primary images that your product al
ready has.

There is onlv one limit to the number, or the range of fa
vorable images that vou can add to that product personality. Sim
ply that you must always include the primary image as their base.
They must emerge from that primary image, and thev must be
logically consistent with its broadest definition.

For example, to return to Marlboro, once vou have devel
oped the primary image to its peak of intensity then there is ab
solutely nothing to stop vou from weaving other powerful appeals
into this base. Connotations of success can be included bv the
model's clothes, such as the tuxedo worn in the first ads, or bv
the possessions he holds. Adventure and excitement can be sug
gested by the situation you picture him in, such as on a boat, in
a plane, riding horseback, etc. Romance bv a voung girl, mvsterv
and affairs of great importance bv a dark background or a brief
case, culture and intellectual achievement bv a rare book or an
antique telescope.

As a matter of fact, many visual symbols, bv themselves, com
municate several different roles of great appeal at the same time.
For example, the single image of ownership of a fine painting
mav express, not only success, but also cultural breeding and in
tellectual accomplishment.

Such multi-image symbols perform two vital tasks for vour
product. They broaden the size of its market bv grafting on new
emotional appeals--social and character identifications that reach
into the fringe areas of that market--that intrigue people who
would not be sufficiently swaved bv the pure functional values
of your product. And second, bv adding in these manv-sided emo
tional images, thev deepen and intensify the emotional attraction
felt for your product bv all the men and women who make up
that market.

Perhaps this can best be shown bv taking a hypothetical
example, of a product with strictly neutral primary images, and


1 22

SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I ON

developing, and weaving together, a network of far stronger
emotional images for it.

Let's start with piston rings, and assume that a new tvpe of
piston ring has just been developed, that lasts longer and there
fore saves oil and gas. Our body copy, of course, develops this
saving theme. We have exploited the functional advantages of
the product as far as possible. We are now ready to reinforce
these benefits by expanding the product's social and character
appeals.

We start by taking inventory. We have a prodiret--piston
rings. It has only a few primary images--mechanical, precisionmade, unseen. Nothing exciting here. It also has a primary sit
uation--replacement, and always by a mechanic, and usually onlv
when there's trouble.

These primary images are either neutral or negative. But
they're all we have to work with. They, and they alone, must form
the foundation, must set the direction, for every other appeal we
bring into the over-all image we are constructing.

So we know that we must deal with the act of replacement,
and that the replacement must be done by a mechanic. These
are our limitations--but once we observe them, we turn them into
the starting point for the true emotional message ice want to
broadcast through our ad. We take each of these primary ele
ments, and glamorize, dramatize and emotionalize them to the
brink.

The car itself--what kind of car shall it be? Certainly not a
beat-up family sedan. Why not a Mercedes SL-300--a $12,000
sports car with its distinctive grill-work sides, and all the emo
tional extras of power, speed, skill-in-handling, plus sophistica
tion, success and downright excitement.

Now the garage--what should it look like? A sports-car shop,

of course. Neat, clean, precise. With high-power equipment
gleaming chrome and steel--hanging on the walls, ready on the
shelves, being installed on other sports models in the background.
The mechanic is not young, not old, simply mature. Rugged,


SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I ON

1 23

knowledgeable, precise. He's sure of what he's doing--there isn't
a wasted motion or a wasted tool anywhere about him.

The owner of the car is young, wiry, yirile, but he too has
been around. (Put into words, these images must take on a mea
sure of disbelief, which we express by saying they're "corny."
However, expressed in visual terms, where they can be symbol
ized, and therefore implied rather than named, they enter into
our minds unnoticed, and we accept them without question. Ver
bal terms--words and sentences--can be used to imply images
of identification; but these are different tvpes of images, and must
be conveyed in a different way. We will touch on this verbal
image building again, as related to excitement and mood, in Chap
ter 14.

The owner is not a professional driver, but he races the car
for sport (we know this bv the roll-over bar over the back of the
seats). He loves this car (its perfect shine, its gleaming chrome
engine, its complete absence of even a spot of dirt). He too is
precise (the chronometer on his wrist). And he carries his suc
cess with a complete casualness (the absence of anv special driv
ing outfit--just slacks and a sport shirt).

And what about the relationship between the two men?
Knowledge complementing skill. The expert in one field advising
the expert in another. Comfort, understanding, teamwork--lead
ing to mutual achievement.

And what are thev doing? Replacing rings, of course. But
not because the old rings have developed trouble (nothing in this
car would be left unchecked long enough to have developed a
flaw). But because this mechanic is installing these new rings in
this car as high-performance equipment, exactly as he would in
stall a supercharger to increase its horsepower.

Everything about the picture--its camera angle, its compo
sition, its lighting, the angle of the men's heads and arms as thev
examine the rings--develops the emotion of precision and the
excitement and drama of discovering new performance through
greater and greater precision.


1 24

SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: IDENTIFICATION

It is a picture, a situation and a mood that invites partici
pation. The reader may not notice every emotional detail that
you have developed; but he will sense the excitement and plea
sure that you have built up. He will wish to share in this world.
And he will buy the product that gives him this world--that of
fers it as a bonus to all its functional and physical satisfactions.

On the Limits to the Images Your
Prospects Will Identify With

I must insert a warning here. Although these identification -
images are immensely powerful when used correctly, there arc
also strict rules and limits to their use. And, if they are used in
correctly, they can be disastrous.

Many campaigns have collapsed because they have asked
their market to identify themselves with an unbelievable image.
For example, the deodorant-soap campaign of several vears ago
that used an elite, society image to sell the mass market. The
men and women who composed the market could not make the
jump between themselves and the characters pictured in the ad.
And they not only refused to believe the suggested identification.
but the disbelief spread to the performance claims themselves.
and killed the sales.

The key to avoiding such mistakes, of course, is the struc
ture of the word, unbelievable. What makes an image--or a claim,
or an idea--believable or not believable? We shall discuss this
question thoroughly in the next few chapters. However, in rela
tion to image-building, the answer lies in two points:

1. What do people already believe about the personality of
your product? Do they believe, today, that it has the character
traits that you say it has? And--if they do--can they identify
themselves, their lives, their present position in society, or their
next step up in society with these traits?

If the answer to both these questions is Yes, then you can


SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I ON

1 25

use the image exactly as you've conceived it. If, however, either
one of the answers is No, then vou must move on to the second
step:

2. What other primary

image do I have to use as a
believability-bridge to connect what my prospect already believes
with what I want him to believe when he finishes my ad? If he
doesn't believe that mv product has those desirable character
traits, then I have to start with what he already believes. I have
to use these images as a base, and build up to my desired over
all image, as we discussed before.

And, in addition, if mv prospect believes that my product
does possess these target-traits, but doesn't believe that they re
late to his life, as it exists in either the present or the future,
then again I have to use a bridge-image. I have to insert a firstseen image that he can immediately identify with, and use that
acceptable identification as^a hook to hang my target-image on to.
For example, in the Marlboro ad, men who would never
identify themselves immediately with a yachting costume or an
opera hat, accepted the image completely after it was introduced
by the acceptable virility concept of the male model smoking the
cigarette.

If you demand that your prospect jump across a believabilitychasm, vour ad will fail. If, however, you build a bridge of ideas
or images across that chasm--starting on his side--then he will
let vou lead him almost anywhere.

On Saleable Identifications Springing
From the Physical Product Itself

We mentioned in Chapter 2 that for the purposes of prepar
ing an advertisement, everv product can be considered to be
two products. There is the functional product--what the prod
uct does for the consumer. And there is the physical product--
what the consumer actually gets. In tapping mass desire, we put


1 26

SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: IDENTIFICATION

aside the physical product, and concentrated on functional per
formances. Now, in searching for image-sources to build pow
erful identifications, we re-examine the physical product itself
lhe physical product can be broken down into three sem
l c

rate areas:

1. Its appearance;
2. Its components and structure; and
3. The technical background from which it emerged
Each one of these areas has image potential. In each one of
them you may find strong primary images that already exist Or
m each one of them you may be able to graft on related images
that will greatly increase the sales of your product

For example, the appearance of'vour product. As you re
ceive it, that product's appearance is probably determined by func
tion. Lets say that the product is mechanical, like a car In this
case, its appearance will be a combination of what it has to do
(ro 1 on a highway, carry six people, shelter them against wind
and rain, etc.), and the cheapest practical way of doing it. Out
of this combination of performance and^ economy comes the raw
shell of your c a r - i ts basic functional appearance. It is at this
point that you start to build in the images.

You do this in two ways. First, you exploit the dramatic pri
mary images that already exist in the extreme forms of your prod
uct. For cars, for instance, you borrow from the glamour c a r sthe severe streamlining and stabilizing fin of the racing c a r - t he
hub caps and wheel wells of the sports c a r - t he exhaust ports
and roof line of the custom car. And you blend their feeling of
excitement and power and distinction into the family sedan

But this is only the first step. Once you have exploited the
already-existing primary images in your product-if there are
any-you then begin to weave in other images that have ab
solutely nothing to do with the necessary physical structure of
your product. And you alter the appearance of your product to
accommodate and express these images.

' '


SECOND T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I ON

1 27

For example, many products are chemical rather than me
chanical. They are liquids, powders, sprays, granulates, etc. There
fore their physical appearance, to the manufacturer, is completely
arbitrary. Outside of the need to hold them together and shield
them against wear, their physical package can take any shape you
wish.

Here, of course, there are no primary images arising from
functional appearance at all. All the images that you wish to shape
into vour package must be borrowed. And where do you borrow
them from? From the background of your product. Or from its
components. Or from the values of society as a whole.

For example, the product's background. One of the most bril
liant packaging concepts in years was Johnson & Johnson's Micrin. Here was a mouth wash--a liquid--sold in drug stores and
supermarkets--whose effectiveness far exceeded any similar prod
uct ever sold before. How were thev to convey that effectiveness
to the consumer at a glance?

They simply took the physical shape of glass containers that
are found only in doctors' offices and operating rooms, and tran
scribed that exact shape onto an over-the-counter product. Use
this shape to house an ice-blue liquid, that in itself suggests med
ical cleanliness, and you have a product that says instantly, "This
is doctor's-liquidNThis is medicine. This works."

Here the background of the product is symbolized in the
product's container. So effectively that the container itself be
comes the finest image-illustration that the agency could use in
creating their ad. Where the background of your product con
tains elements that inspire