ly to miss the mark on this
headline, because you have far fewer guideposts to direct you.
Your headline no longer refers to i/our product, but it must there
fore refer even more strongly to your market. It cannot simply
be a startler, or an attention-getter, or humorous, or cute. Nor
can it mask the fact that it has no headline behind a prettv pic
ture. Most copy writers use a fifth stage problem to write an
empty headline, and are therefore simply wasting their client's
money.

Because it is so easy to wander off into an irrelevant head
line, keep this one cardinal rule in mind. Your prospect must
identify with your headline before lie can buy from it. It must
be his headline, his problem, his state of mind at that particular
moment. It must pick out the product's logical prospects--and
reject as many people as it attracts.

And, if it is an effective headline, and it works, then it too
will become outdated as your market moves on to a new stage
of awareness. And you will be presented with another problem,
just as challenging, and just as rewarding, as the one you have
solved before. You never step in the same river twice. No mar
ket ever stands still.

A Final Word on Style in Advertising Copy

Markets change; desires change; fashions change. And so do
the acceptable styles of advertisements change. Certain advertis
ing styles--the form your advertising message takes--grow tired
with time--then stale--then actually laughable. At the turn of
the century, effective ads were written in verse; twenty years later,
no one would believe them. In the 1920s most of the great ads
were narrative stories--either first-person confessions, or third
person revelations, or comic strips dramatizations. Today every
thing but the comic strip is gone--and we see less and less of it
every year. When a new style is born, people believe it, and it


36

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

reinforces the message it is carrying. When that same style grows
trite, people cannot see the message for the advertisement.

We'll explore this subject further, in the chapters discussing
Mood and Disguise in writing advertisements. Meanwhile, one
more note here.

In effective advertising, though stvles may change, strategydoes not. If you will study the piano and bridesmaid ads in this
chapter, you will notice this: That while the narrative style of
both is now old-hat, you can still respond to their power. Both
tap desires that still exist--though now perhaps directed toward
different products and different problems. And both evoke those
desires, and channel those desires, so effectively, that if they
were rewritten in today's idiom, and applied to different prod
ucts, they still might sell millions of dollars worth of goods today.


THE SOPHISTICATION OF
YOUR MARKET:
HOW MANY PRODUCTS
HAVE B E EN THERE
BEFORE YOU?

As we mentioned before, in Chap
ter 2, there are three questions vou must answer before vou can
determine what goes into vour headline. These are:

1. What is the mass desire that motivates your market?
2. How much does your market know about your product?

(Their State of Awareness.)

3. How many similar products have they been told about be

fore? (Their State of Sophistication.)

This third question is the most easilv answered. A few hours
research should give you samples of everv competing ad in the
field--if there are any.

If You Are First in Your Market

If there are not--if vou are the first in your particular market,
with your particular product--then you are dealing with prospects
37


•JO

T HE SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

that have no sophistication about your product at all. In other
words, thev have never received any information about such a
product before. Once you get them interested, they are likelv to
become much more enthusiastic, believe much more of what you
have to say, and buy that much more readily. Remember, vour
story is brand-new to them.

This, of course, is the dream of every manufacturer and every
copy writer. To be first. And it happens quite often today. Some
times because of a technological breakthrough--creating a new
product (women's hair sprays), or a radically better product (longplaying records), or a familiar product at an explosively low price
(the Model T Ford).

And sometimes, such a brand-new market is created by the
insight of an advertising man, dealing with an already-established
product. In this case, the ad man visualizes the application of the
product to an entirely different market (the switch, in the Twen
ties, of Ovaltine from an aid for insomnia to a body builder for
skinnv children).

Or he reaches that market through a hitherto untapped
medium (Revlons fabulous results from sponsorship of "The
$64,000 Question" in the early days of TV).

Or he discovers a previously unnoticed performance of his
product that carries it completely beyond the limits of its old
market (Lifebuoy's discovery that people would accept its strong
medicinal odor as a cure for perspiration odor, and their subse
quent christening of that odor with the catch-word "B.O.").

When such a golden opportunity--to be first--presents it
self, you are probably dealing with a market in its third or fourth
stage of awareness. Your prospects know that they would like
what your product does, or they would like to get rid of the prob
lem your product solves--if it were only possible.

Here, the answer to your third question is quite simple. You
are dealing with a market where you are first. Therefore thev
have no previous information about similar products. Therefore
they are completely unsophisticated.


T HE SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

39

And vour exploitation of this answer--your strategy in ap

proaching this market--is equally simple:

1. Be simple. Be direct. Above all, don't be fancy. 'Same ei
ther the need or the claim in your headline--nothing more. Dra
matize that claim in your copy--make it as powerful as possible.
And. then bring in your product; and prove that it works.

Nothing more--because nothing more is needed. To illus
trate, let's look at one of the most profitable, insatiable, constantlyrenewing, and therefore overworked fields in marketing history:
the reducing field. No one knows who was the first man to stum
ble on the reducing field (though it's fairly certain that he must
have become a millionaire). But all he had to say in his headline
as a simple statement of the direct desire of millions of women:

w:

"NOW! LOSE UGLY FAT!"

As he started to clean up, others inevitably followed. But, by
this time, the reducing field had already been tapped. Advertise
ments had been run. The direct claim had been made. Mere rep
etition would no longer be enough. In other words, the reducing
market was now in its Second Stage of Sophistication. A new ap
proach was necessary. The strategy had to be changed--to this:

If You're Second, Do This

If you're second, and the direct claim is still working--then
copy that successful claim--but enlarge on it. Drive it to the ab
solute limit. Outbid your competition.

For example, here are two successful headlines in the now
fiercelv-competitive reducing field that did just that. They have
both been pushed to the outer limits of both legality and believabilitv. But thev both worked.

'LOSE UP TO 47 POUNDS IN 4 WEEKSOR RECEIVE $40 BACK!"


40

T HE SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

"I AM 61 POUNDS LIGHTER
. . . NEVER A HUNGRY MINUTE."

In most fields, this enlarged-claim technique reaches the
outer limits in successive stages. Sometimes the completion of
this process takes years. In the home garden field, as another ex
ample, an advertiser brought out a Floribunda Rose--using this
headline with startling success:

"PICK 25--50--100 ROSES
FROM THIS ONE MAGNIFICENT PLANT!"

It worked. And so, some years later, a special variety of cush

ion mum swept the country with this headline:

"SIX HUNDRED MUMS
FROM A SINGLE BUSH!"

And, one year later, this headline carried the process to what

are probably the absolute limits of Mother Nature:

"WHO EVER HEARD OF
17,000 BLOOMS
FROM A SINGLE PLANT?"

As simple as this evolution looks, it produces results. It pro
vided a tremendous lift to car sales in the 1950s, when 50 more
horsepower was added to the advertisements everv vear. It was
climaxed in the Chrysler 300--a car named after its horsepower
rating--and pegged just at the limit of believability, practicality,
and the inevitable public reaction.

For the reaction will come. Toward the end, the process
disintegrates. The successful claim is overworked; enlargement
piles on enlargement. New competitors enter the field--each try
ing to promise more. Headlines double and triple in size. Words
begin to lose their meaning--"whiter-than-whites" appear. The
prospect becomes confused--then skeptical. Believability is shat
their
tered; claims are automatically discounted 50% by
readers. More promise is poured in to compensate. The govern-


T HE SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

41

merit begins to investigate. And the sales curve begins to turn
down-down-down.

The Third Stage of Sophistication

At this point, your market has entered into its Third Stage
of Sophistication. Your prospects have now heard all the claims--
all the extremes. Perhaps they have even bought one or two com
petitive products. Every time they open a newspaper, another
similar headline screams out at them. How are they to distin
guish one product from the mass? How do you break through to
reach them?

One factor is vital here. That is the restorative power of the
market you are dealing with. It may be a market based on a con
stantly recurring mass instinct, such as reducing. It may be a mar
ket based on an unsolved technological problem, such as spark
plug replacement. It may be a market that periodically wishes to
renew or improve its purchases, such as cars, homes, appliances.
In all these cases, the desire never fades; the market continuallv renews itself. New prospects come into the market. Old
customers become dissatisfied with their old purchases, their old
solutions, and begin to look again. The mass desire--the tremen
dous profit potential--still exists. But it cannot be tapped by the
old, simple methods any longer.

Women still want to lose weight. But by now they've read
dozens of ads for reducing aids--all promising them to take off
20, 30, 40 pounds in a matter of weeks. They no longer fully be
lieve them. Perhaps the}' believe these ads so little that they won't
even try a new product at all. For months, even years, they may
simplv accept their overweight condition as "something that just
can't be helped."

But the desire never fades. The dissatisfaction builds up,
month after month. Secretly, perhaps even unconsciously, these
women are hoping to find a new product--a new headline--that
promises them a new way to satisfy that age-old desire.


42

T HE SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

And on this fundamental fact, we build our strategy for sell

ing a market in its Third Stage of Sophistication.

If your market is at the stage where they've heard all the
claims, in all their extremes, then mere repetition or exaggeration
wont work any longer. What this market needs now is a new de
vice to make all these old claims become fresh and believable to
them again. In other words, A NEW MECHANISM--a new way
to making the old promise work. A different process--a fresh
chance--a brand-new possibility of success where only disap
pointment has resulted before.

Here the emphasis shifts from what the product does to
HOW it works. Not accomplishment, but performance becomes
dominant. The headline expands. The claim remains--but now
it is reinforced by the mechanism that accomplishes it. In the re
ducing field, for example, the limits of its basic promise had been
reached bv headlines like this:

"I AM 61 POUNDS LIGHTER
. . . NEVER A HUNGRY MINUTE."

Now new leaders emerge--avoiding the competition of

claims--stressing mechanism instead, like this:

"FLOATS FAT RIGHT OUT
OF YOUR BODY!"

ft ft ft

"FIRST WONDER DRUG
FOR REDUCING!"

A vital change has taken place in both these ads--and in
every ad that deals successfully with this Third Stage of Sophis
tication. In the previous, Second-Stage ads, the entire headline
was taken up by a complete statement of the main claim. Below
it, in smaller type, in either a subhead or the bodv copy, came
the mechanism that accomplished the claim. Often, this mecha
nism was abbreviated--simply mentioned instead of being ex
plained--indicated bv a sort of shorthand, like this:


T HE SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

43

"I AM 61 POUNDS LIGHTER
. . . NEVER A HUNGRY MINUTE.'

Read the Astonishing Experience of New York Food

Expert with the Famous Eat-and-Redtice Plan.

In Third-Stage ads, however, this arrangement is completely
reversed. By this time, the basic claim has become well-known
to almost all its prospects--perhaps even too well-known. There
fore, this shorthand can be applied to the claim itself. What was
before a five to ten word headline describing nothing but the
basic claim--"I AM 61 P O U N DS LIGHTER"--Hint- can he com
municated
how this claim is accomplished. For instance:

in a headline devoted to explaining

in a single word

Or:

"FLOATS FAT RIGHT
OUT OF YOUR BODY!"

"FIRST WONDER DRUG
FOR REDUCING!"

First the mechanism is brought into the headline to establish
a point of difference--to make the old claims fresh and believable
again. And then--once the prospect is told that here is a brandnew chance for success--then the claim can he restated in full, to
make sure that she realizes everything she is getting. Like this:

"FLOATS FAT RIGHT
OUT OF YOUR BODY!"

Released for the first time! The amazing scientific discoverv that melts up to 37 POUNDS off men and women--
without starvation diets, without a single hungry moment--
without even giving up the foods you love!

Or--using the same Third-Stage arrangement of mechanism
in the headline, and claim elaborated in the lead paragraph--we
have this ad:


44

T HE SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

"FIRST WONDER DRUG
FOR REDUCING!"

Used successfully by thousands of phvsicians! Lose as
many pounds as you like without diets, without exercise,
without giving up the kinds of food vou love to eat!

In both these ads--and all others like them--the promise it
self is subordinated to the mechanism which accomplishes that
promise. This mechanism is featured in the headline. When ads
such as these are successful, you are dealing with a market that
is in its Third Stage of Sophistication.

The Fourth Stage

But you are still in a competitive market, and such ads give
only a temporary advantage. Such ads, presenting a new promise,
begin a new trend. Within a few months, the Third Stage of So
phistication passes into a Fourth Stage--a new stage of elabora
tion and enlargement. But this time, the elaboration is concen
trated on the mechanism, rather than on the promise--like this:

"FIRST NO-DIET REDUCING
WONDER DRUG!"

This Fourth Stage strategy can be summarized like this:
If a competitor has just introduced a new mechanism to
achieve the same claim as that performed by your product, and
that new-mechanism announcement is producing sales, then you
counter in this way. Simply elaborate or enlarge upon the suc
cessful mechanism. Make it easier, quicker, surer; allow it to solve
more of the problem; overcome old limitations; promise extra bene
fits. You are beginning a stage of embellishment similar to the
Second Stage of Sophistication described above. The same strat
egy will be effective here.

But, unfortunately, so will the same limitations. The Fourth


T HE SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

45

Stage of Sophistication, like the Second Stage which it resem
bles, eventually pushes itself out of the realm of believabilitv. At
this point, further elaborations become ineffective. You are then
faced with two alternatives:

First, discovering a new, acceptable mechanism to make the
promise fresh and believable again. But remember, the mecha
nism vou use must not only be new and legitimate, but it must
be accepted as believable and significant by vour market. Each
Third and Fourth Stage ad that precedes you, makes this prob
lem of acceptance more and more difficult.

Eventually, of course, no new mechanism will gain accep
tance. The market will have grown tired of your promises and
the mechanisms bv which thev are accomplished. Your prospects
will have been glutted bv advertising. You will have reached the
Fifth Stage of Sophistication--the most difficult--where the field
is said to be exhausted--where competitors are dropping out of
the market en masse.

How to Revive a "Dead" Product

In this Final Stage of Sophistication, your market no longer
believes in your advertising, and therefore no longer wishes to he
aware of your product. In many ways, therefore, this Fifth Stage
of Sophistication corresponds to the Fifth Stage of Awareness dis
cussed in Chapter 2. The problems are the same. The strategy is
the same. The emphasis shifts from the promise and the mecha
nism which accomplishes it, to identification with the prospect
himself. You are dealing here with the problem of bringing your
prospect into your ad--not through desire--but through identi
fication. (See Chapter 8.)

An outstanding example of a product which had lost its mar
ket because of such a Fifth Stage of Sophistication, and then
gained it back by a brilliant use of the identification headline, is
the Postum ad discussed in Chapter 2, and its headline, "WHY
MEN CRACK . . ."


46

T HE SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

T HE SOI'HI

and hciiai:

Let's Look at an Industry That Went Through
All Five Stages of Sophistication

But perhaps the classic example of an industry which en
countered all five Stages of Sophistication--and overcame them--
is the Cigarette Industry. The history of cigarette advertising is
a continuous battle against competition, against physical and so
cial taboos, even against the very success of its own current ad
vertising; which saturates and exhausts the market bv the weight
of its combined industry expenditures, and constantly demands
new approaches.

Let's briefly examine the main current of cigarette advertis
ing first--the progression from the first to the fifth Stages of
Sophistication--and then discuss some of the side problems it
encountered.

In the First Stage of Sophistication, when the market was
new, cigarette advertising featured taste, enjoyment, pleasure in
the headline:

"I'D WALK A MILE FOR A CAMEL!"

"CHESTERFIELD--THEY SATISFY!"

This raw promise of enjoyment gradually became elaborated
and embellished to push it to the limits of believabilitv. In this
Second Stage, since you cannot measure the pleasure a cigarette
gives you, the promise-growth took the form of broader and
broader comparisons:

"LIGHT UP A LUCKY, AND YOU WONT MISS
THE SWEETS THAT MAKE YOU FAT!"

But, without measurement, the limits of enlargement are
soon reached. So Third-Stage strategy began to be emploved--a
continuous stream of brilliant new mechanisms:

"LUCKIES--THEY'RE TOASTED!"


T HE SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

4 I

"PALL MALL'S GREATER LENGTH FILTERS
THE SMOKE FURTHER!"

"CAMELS--PROTECT YOUR T-ZONE!"

And, as each of these mechanisms was accepted bv the buy
ing public, the originators competitors adopted the mechanism
and began to elaborate on it--initiating the Fourth Stage:

"PHILIP MORRIS--ALL THE HARSHNESS BAKED OUT!"

"CHESTERFIELD--REGULAR AND KING-SIZED
TOO!"

"NINE OUT OF TEN DOCTORS PREFER
LUCKIES!"

But eventually the mechanisms lost their potency, and the
government ruled out the health claims; and in the early Fifties
the industry faced a Fifth Stage market. But a new marketing
tool--Motivation Research--had shown them how to reach this
market without mechanisms or claims, without even headlines,
simply by projecting strong visual identifications with the virility
that the public had accepted in a cigarette. For example, anv of
the Marlboro "Virile Men" ads. Or their imitations in Chester
field, or Camel ads.

Thus we have the full spectrum of sophistication confronting
an industry. But cigarette advertisers also encountered two crit
ical side problems. The first offered them the opportunity of dou
bling their market. The second, of retaining that huge market in
the face of the most adverse publicity

The first challenge occurred immediately following the First
World War. By this time the old "Coffin Nails" taboo had been
forgotten--for men. But there still remained the equally great po
tential market of women smokers--if smoking could be made re
spectable for women. The trend was definitely in that direction--
the urge, the curiosity existed in millions of women in all social


48

T HE SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

classes--.some respectable women were actually daring to smoke
in public.

But the trend--left by itself--would take years to develop. An
advertisement had to be created to accelerate that trend. To make
smoking for women not only acceptable, but desirable. To channel
the vast movement toward liberation and equality of the Twenties
as the driving force to open up this huge new market.

But such an advertisement could never come right out and
suggest that women smoke. It could not even show a woman
smoking. Such an advertisement was definitely a Fifth Stage prob
lem--a problem in identification. And it was solved by linking a
man and woman in their most appealing connection--in love
with a smoking situation. The ad showed a young couple, sitting
together on a beach on a moonlit night. He is just lighting up
a cigarette--the first puffs of smoke are just drifting into the
moonlight. She has her face turned toward his, and her words
make up the entire headline (and, except for the logo, the en
tire ad):

"BLOW SOME MY WAV."

Nothing more needed to be said. A vast new market--opened

up with four words.

The second challenge occurred thirty vears later. This
the cancer scare of the late Fifties, which continues into today
It resulted in four reactions: First, there were cigarette holders,
water pipes, ceramic filters, etc.--none of which succeeded in es
tablishing a national market, since they represented too much
inconvenience, too blatant an admission that the purchaser was
worried about his smoking.

was

Secondly, the scare produced a determined effort in the in
dustry itself to conduct its own research, to counteract or cor
rect such claims.

Third, it produced a temporary drop in cigarette sales.
And, fourth, it opened up a vast new market for an already


T HE SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

49

existing product--the filter cigarette--aided by the industry it
self, which wisely gambled that smokers would not move out of
cigarettes, but simply into a different kind of cigarette.

Filter cigarettes had always existed, as a small, specialty mar
ket. But now they were expanded into a mass market. Millions
of new prospects, who had never before even considered filter
cigarettes, now sought out information about them, asked to be
told which one to b uy A new market opened up. And it started
to retrace the same Stages of Sophistication as its parent market
had passed through fifty years before:

First Stage:

"KENT'S MICRONITE FILTER TRAPS TARS BE
FORE THEY REACH YOUR LIPS'"

Second Stage:

"20,000 FILTER TRAPS IN VICEROY!"

Third Stage:

"PARLIAMENT--THE MOST IMPORTANT V* INCH
IN SMOKING TODAY--NO FILTER FEEDBACK!"

Fourth Stage:

"TAREYTON--DUAL FILTER FOR DOUBLE THE
PLEASURE!"

And the Fifth Stage--in an industry-wide stroke of genius--

right back to the flavor again:

"WINSTON TASTES GOOD LIKE A CIGARETTE
SHOULD!"

"IT'S WHAT'S UP FRONT THAT COUNTS!"

"L & M HAS FOUND THE SECRET THAT UN
LOCKS THE FLAVOR!"


50

T HE SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

And so it goes. In industry after industry. The same life cycle
for each market. The same deadly challenges. The same willing
ness to adapt rather than perish.

A Personal Note

In this book I have tried to write a scientific study of ad
vertising, without troubling the reader with whatever personal
ethics I myself may observe. Every copv writer who has ever
sweated for days to create a new approach will know how it
feels to see that approach copied overnight bv a competitor. I
share every ounce of that feeling. But such events happen every
day. And they are effective. Therefore, examples such as those
detailed above must be listed, in all objectivitv, as a business
strategy that has and will solve competitive problems in a com
petitive industry. I include them here--not as recommendations,
but as possible strategies to be chosen or rejected.


4
38 WAYS TO STRENGTHEN
YOUR HEADLINE
ONCE YOU HAVE YOUR
BASIC IDEA

Up to this point, we have been
concerned with the strategy of planning copv--of arriving at the
theme of our ad and the content of its headline--rather than
with the techniques of actually writing this copy. The entire sec
ond portion of the book will be devoted to these techniques.
But we must pause now, and examine one of these techniques
out of sequence. It is called VERBALIZATION. And it is the
art of increasing the impact of a headline bi/ the way in which
it is stated.

Everything we have done so far lias helped us obtain the
content of our headline. We now know what we want to say. And
we now have to determine how to sav it.

The most obvious wav, of course, is simplv to state the claim
in its barest form. "Lose Weight," or "Stop Corns." for example.
And if you are the first in vour field, there is no better wav.

But where vou are competitive, or where the thought is too

51


52

38 WAYS TO S T R E N G T H EN YOUR H E A D L I NE

complicated to be stated simply and directly, then you must re
inforce that claim by binding other images to it with the words
in which you express it. This is Verbalization. And it can ac
complish several different purposes:

1. It can strengthen the claim--bv enlarging upon it, by mea

suring it, by making it more vivid, etc.

2. It can make the claim new and fresh again--bv twisting
it, changing it, presenting it from a different angle, turning it into
a narration, challenging the reader with an example, etc.

3. It can help the claim pull the prospect into the body of
the ad--by promising him information about it, bv questioning
him, by partially revealing mechanism, etc.

All of these goals are accomplished by adding variations, en
largements or embellishments to the main headline claim of the
ad. These additional images are bound into the main claim bv
the sentence structure of the headline. Thev alter the main claim
to make it more effective.

They are the second creative step in writing the ad. First,
we have seen how to determine the appeal itself. And now, howto shape that appeal into its most effective form in the headline.
There are, of course, an infinite number of these variations
(every good copywriter invents a few himself). But there are gen
eral patterns that most of them follow. Here are some of these
guideposts for vour own thinking:

1. Measure the size of the claim:

"20,000 FILTER TRAPS IN VICEROY!"

"I AM 61 POUNDS LIGHTER . . ."

'WHO EVER HEARD OF 17,000 BLOOMS

FROM A SINGLE PLANT?"

2. Measure the speed of the claim:

"FEEL BETTER FAST!"


38 WAYS TO S T R E N G T H EN YOUR H E A D L I NE

53

"7A7 TWO SECONDS, BAYER ASPIRIN BEGINS

TO DISSOLVE IN YOUR GLASS!'"

3. Compare the claim:

"SIX TIMES WHITER WASHES!"

"COSTS UP TO $300 LESS THAN MANY MOD

ELS OF THE LOW-PRICED THREE!"

4. Metaphorize the claim:

"BANISHES CORNS!"

"MELTS AWAY UGLY FAT!"

5. Sensitize the claim bv making the prospect feel, smell,

touch, see or hear it:

"TASTES LIKE YOU JUST PICKED IT!"

"THE SKIN YOU LOVE TO TOUCH!"

6. Demonstrate the claim bv showing a prime example:

"JAKE LAMOTTA, 160 POUND FIGHTER, FAILS

TO FLATTEN MONO PAPER CUP!"

"AT 60 MILES AN HOUR, THE LOUDEST NOISE
IN THIS ROLLS ROYCE IS THE ELECTRIC CLOCK!"

7. Dramatize the claim, or its result:

"HERE'S AN EXTRA 850, GRACE--I'M MAK

ING BIG MONEY NOW!"

"THEY LAUGHED WHEN I SAT DOWN AT
THE PIANO--BUT WHEN I STARTED TO PLAY . . ."

8. State the claim as a paradox:

"HOW A BALD-HEADED BARBER SAVED MY

HAIR!"

"BEAT THE RACES BY PICKING LOSERS!"


54

38 WAYS TO S T R E N G T H EN YOUR H E A D L I NE

9. Remove limitations from the claim:

"SHRINKS HEMORRHOIDS WITHOUT SUR

GERY!"

"YOU BREATHE NO DUSTY ODORS WHEN

YOU DO IT WITH LEWYT!"

10. Associate the claim with values or people with whom

the prospect wishes to be identified:

"MICKEY MANTLE SAYS: CAMELS NEVER

BOTHER MY THROAT!"

"9 OUT OF 10 DECORATORS USE WUNDAWEAVE CARPETS FOR LONG LIFE AT LOW COST!"

11. Show how much work, in detail, the claim does:

"NOW! RELIEF FROM ALL 5 ACID-CAUSED

STOMACH TROUBLES--IK SECONDS!"

"RELIEVES CONGESTION IN ALL 7 NASAL

PASSAGES INSTANTLY!"

12. State the claim as a question:

"WHO ELSE WANTS A WHITER WASH--WITH

NO HARD WORK?"

"COULD YOU USE $25 A WEEK EXTRA IN

COME?"

13. Offer information about how to accomplish the claim:

"HOW TO WIN FRIENDS AND INFLUENCE

PEOPLE!"

"HERE'S WHAT TO DO TO GET RID OF

PIMPLES FAST!"

14. Tie authority into the claim:

"BOSS MECHANIC SHOWS HOW TO AVOID

ENGINE REPAIR BILLS!"


38 WAYS TO S T R E N G T H EN YOUR H E A D L I NE

"HERE'S WHAT DOCTORS DO WHEN THEY

FEEL ROTTEN!"

15. Before-and-after the claim:

"BEFORE COLDENE A CHILD GOT OVER A
COLD AFTER 5 DAYS OF ACHING, SNEEZING,
WHEEZING, DRIPPING, SUFFERING, COUGH
ING, CRYING, GAGGING, SPITTING."

"WITH COLDENE A CHILD GETS OVER A

COLD IN FIVE DAYS!"

16. Stress the newness of the claim:

"ANNOUNCING! GUIDED MISSILE SPARK

PLUGS!"

"NOW! CHROME PLATE WITHOUT HEAT,

ELECTRICITY, MACHINERY!"

17. Stress the exclusivity of the claim:

"OURS ALONE! PERSIAN LAMB ORIGINALS--

$389.40!"

"ONLY GLEEM HAS GL-70 TO KEEP TEETH
CLEAN ALL DAY LONG WITH ONE BRUSHING!"

18. Turn the claim into a challenge for the reader:

"WHICH TWIN HAS THE TONI? AND WHICH

HAS THE $15 PERMANENT?"

"DOES SHE OR DOESN'T SHE? HAIR COL
ORING SO NATURAL ONLY HER HAIRDRESSER
KNOWS FOR SURE!"

19. State the claim as a case-history quotation:

"LOOK, MOM--NO CAVITIES!"

"WOULD YOU BELIEVE IT--I HAVE A COLD!"


•56

38 WAYS TO S T R E N G T H EN YOUR H E A D L I NE

20. Condense the claim--interchange your product and the

product it replaces:

"NOW! A RING AND PISTON JOB IN A TUBE!"

"POUR YOURSELF A NEW ENGINE!"

21. Symbolize the claim--replace the direct statement or

measurement of the claim with a parallel reality:

"STARTING NEXT TUESDAY, THE ATLANTIC
OCEAN BECOMES ONLY ONE-FIFTH AS LONG!"

22. Connect the mechanism to the claim in the headline:

"FLOATS FAT RIGHT OUT OF YOUR BODY!"

"FEEDS W\STE GAS FUMES BACK INTO

YOUR ENGINE!"

23. Startle the reader by contradicting the wav he thinks the

mechanism should work:

" H IT HELL OUT OF THE BALL WITH YOUR

RIGHT HAND,' SAYS TOMMY ARMOUR!"

24. Connect the need and the claim in the headline:

"THERE IS ONLY ONE SOLUTION TO AN AD

VERTISING PROBLEM: FIND THE MAN!"

25. Offer information in the ad itself:

"WHY MEN CRACK . . ."

"WHAT EVERYBODY OUGHT TO KNOW ABOUT

THIS STOCK AND BOND BUSINESS!"

26. Turn the claim or the need into a case historv:

"AUNT MEG, WHO NEVER MARRIED . . ."

"AGAIN SHE ORDERS--A CHICKEN SALAD,

PLEASE'"


38 WAYS TO S T R E N G T H EN YOUR H E A D L I NE

57

27. Give a name to the problem or need:

"WHEN YOU'RE WEARY WITH DAY-TIME FA

TIGUE, TAKE ALKA-SELTZER."

28. Warn the reader about possible pitfalls if he doesn't use

the product:

"DON'T INVEST ONE CENT OF YOUR HARDEARNED MONEY UNTIL YOU CHECK THIS GUIDE!"

29. Emphasize the claim bv its phraseology--bv breaking it

into two sentences, or repeating it, or a part of it:

"A MAN YOU CAN LEAN ON! THAT'S KLOPER-

MAN!"

"NOBODY BUT NOBODY UNDERSELLS GIM-

BEL'S!"

30. Show how easv the claim is to accomplish bv imposing

a imiversallv-overcome limitation:

"IF YOU CAN COUNT TO ELEVEN, YOU CANINCREASE YOUR SPEED AND SKILL AT NUM
BERS!"

31. State the difference in the headline:

"THE DIFFERENCE

IN PREMIUM GASO

LINES IS RIGHT IN THE ADDITIVES!"

32. Surprise vour reader into realizing that former limita

tions have now been overcome:

"SEE WHAT HAPPENS WHEN YOU CRUSH A

HARTMAN DC-8? NOTHING!"

33. Address the people who can't buv vour product:

"IF YOU'VE ALREADY TAKEN YOUR VACA
TION, DON'T READ THIS. IT'LL BREAK YOUR
HEART."


58

38 WAYS TO S T R E N G T H EN YOUR H E A D L I NE

34. Address your prospect directly:

"TO THE MAN WHO WILL SETTLE FOR
NOTHING LESS THAN THE PRESIDENCY OF HIS
FIRM."

35. Dramatize how hard it was to produce the claim:

"WHEN JENS FINISHED DESIGNING THIS
CANDLEHOLDER WE HAD TO INVENT A WHOLE
NEW KIND OF CANDLE."

36. Accuse the claim of being too good:

"IS IT IMMORAL TO MAKE MONEY THIS

EASILY?"

37. Challenge the prospects present limiting beliefs:

"YOU ARE TWICE AS SMART AS YOU THINK."

38. Turn the claim into a question and answer:

"YOU DON'T KNOW WHAT'S UNDER THE
HOOD AND YOU COULDN'T CARE LESS AS LONG
AS YOUR CAR RUNS SMOOTHLY. WHO SHOULD
YOU SEE IF IT D O E S N ' T ? . .. SOMEONE WHO
CARES--UNITED DELCO."

And so on: an infinite number of variations. Trv to create

your own--tomorrow.


SUMMARY: THE ART OF
CREATIVE PLANNING--
H OW TO MAKE AN IDEA
GROW

headline problems, and then sum up:

Now, let's look at a few special

The Three Levels of Creativity

Something should be said here about the various approaches
copy writers use to dig up a new headline. As far as I can tell,
there are three of them:

The first, the shallowest, and the most widespread and in
effective, is the Word-Substitute Technique. Here the copy writer
consults a list of proven and successful headlines. He then pulls
out the original product name and substitutes his own; or his own
product's performance, etc. He usually comes up with something
like this:

"I'D WALK A MILE FOR A CUP OF BLANK

COFFEE!"

59


60

SUMMARY: T HE ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

"WHY HAVEN'T BOAT OWNERS BEEN TOLD

THESE FACTS?"

"FLOATS UGLY PIMPLES RIGHT OUT OF YOUR

SKIN!"

If these ads are copied from a similar product, in the same
market, at the same time, then their chance of success is good--
especially if they embellish the promise in any way. But if the
product, or the market, or the timing is different, then the chances
of success diminish proportionately They become Echo Ads
ads that remind people of some other product. Thev pav no at
tention to unique product-market-timing relationship that exists
at the moment. Therefore they lose all the strengths that are
wrapped up in that relationship. They are the kind of ads that
clients write, rather than copy writers.

The second, deeper and more difficult approach is through
formulas. Here the copy writer has memorized a list of rules or
principles, and tries to pour his headline into them like he'd
pour hot lead into a mold. Such rules usually concern the way
a headline is expressed. They list methods of strengthening the
verbalization of the headline idea, and here thev have a perfectlyvalid use. Several examples of these principles are given in Chap
ter 4.

But the idea for an ad or a headline demands its own shape.
It cannot be fitted into someone else's solution. The problem de
fies a formula. And the third, analytical approach that we have
outlined above--with no answers; only guide-posts and ques
tions--offers the onlv wav.

This is a hard fact to accept. It means that a solution which
has cost you days and weeks of painful effort, and which has
done its job perfectly--can be used only once. It means that
there are no creative shortcuts--that the effort must be duplicated
techniques of
with each
probing can be learned and perfected; intuition can be sharpened;

individual ad. But fortunately the


SUMMARY: T HE ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

Di

a sensitivity can be developed for picking out the vital fact from
a maze of information.

And, of course, abandoning this effort leads to a reality which
is even harsher. Manx' copy writers grow old, or tired, or afraid.
They stop searching for the unique solution in every problem.
From this moment on, they begin to copy instead of create. And
most pathetic of all, main' begin to copy themselves. The more
successful the copv writer, the greater the temptation to find his
new headline in his old files.

But it won't work. Copying can be done by any cub. All this
process does is bring talent down to the level of file-cabinet medi
ocrity. The true copy writer must argue with success--he must
push on past it every time he faces a new product. In advertis
ing, as well as in science and in art, the solution to the unique
lies only in itself.

On Motivation Research and Its
Relation to the Copy Writer

As we have repeated throughout this first part of the book,
the copy writer's primary job is to know his market. Many times,
he has to know more about that market than the market knows
about itself.

Before MR, he did this mostly by personal digging, reading,
talking--and guessing. With MR, lie has some pretty professional
guessers working with him. And they have the equipment to prove
their guesses far more easily and inexpensively than writing a
campaign and testing it.

The copy writer can use MR in two ways. It can be a
tremendous source of information to him. Information about
the most powerful needs and desires of his market--desires that
may be hidden, verbally unacceptable, or completely unknown.
It shows him the strength of those desires--their drift and mo
mentum--the taboos that accompany them, and limit their ex
pression. It helps him locate splits in his market--gauge their


62

SUMMARY: T HE ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

points of difference--design pinpoint appeals for each of them.
And it feeds back to him early reactions to his own phraseol
ogy--to test his own worry-points in the ad--to enable him to
shift emphasis--and even to emerge with a completely new idea.
All well and good. But a motivation research finding is not
a headline, nor even the central theme of an ad, nor will it ever
be. Like any other fact, it is a direction. First it tells vou where
not to go, to avoid wasting your time. And then it indicates the
general area of your solution.

But the transformation of those facts into an idea, and the
expression of that idea in the strongest possible form, still re
quires as much creative talent as any other starting point. The
source of an idea, no matter how profound, is still only the be
ginning. The copy writer has to take it from there.

The second great service that MR can perform for the copy
writer is that of testing his own hunches, in answering the ques
tions he uncovers in dealing with his market over a period of
time.

For purposes of simplicity, we have dealt with advertising
strategy as though it always consisted of writing a single ad--
rather than a continuous campaign. By limiting ourselves in this
way, we have been able to deal with each of the phases of such
a campaign as though it were a separate and distinct problem,
requiring a separate and distinct advertisement to solve it. In
doing this, we have emphasized that a breakthrough can occur
at any stage of a campaign; and that the same breakthrough tech
niques can be used to produce the germ idea for the entire cam
paign that follows.

In reality, however, the copy writer usually works on a given
product, or in a given market area, for long periods of time. Dur
ing that time he will write many ads on this same subject. And
during that time he will engage in a kind of discourse with his
market, in which he feeds that market ideas, and it feeds back
to him reactions to those ideas.

During this massive conversation, if he is sensitive, the copy


SUMMARY: T HE ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

63

writer will pick up a continuous flow of the most vital informa
tion. Some of this information will be actual trends and prefer
ences, which can be immediately translated into new ads. But
much more of it will be in negative form--failures, roadblocks,
limitations to the response from his ads. And only the statistical
measurements of these limitations will be shown--not their causes.
The copywriter will want to know why they occur. And in ask
ing whv, he will give birth to questions like these:

What causes one woman to make most of her clothes at
home, and another woman to use her sewing machine only for
minor repairs?

How can we convince more people that it's safe to buy

through mail order?

Why will men instantlv buy an automatic potato peeler--and

women send it right back to the store again?

These are research questions. They deal with psychological
dimensions. The copv writer discovers them, and passes them
along to his MR people to be phrased, tested and answered. Thus
is born a new idea, a new theme, and a new headline, perhaps
even a new campaign.

On Expressing the Personality of a
Product in Your Headline

One of the most potent discoveries of motivation research
is that a product, or a store, or a whole group of products has a
distinct and complete personality to the consumer. This person
ality is a complex quality, embracing many traits. In the case of
the Cadillac, for example, it consists of quality, prestige, perfor
mance, appearance, comfort, resale value, freedom from repairs
and much more.

But--and this is the important point to consider in writing
vour headline--one of these traits will always be the most effec
tive in summarizing and expressing this personality. In the case
of Cadillac, it has always been, and will always be, quality. This


64

SUMMARY: T HE ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

summary trait is featured in a series of headlines, or headline il
lustrations--perhaps blended with one or two of the other traits
to give it variety but always strengthening those other traits bv
interrelating them to this one dominant quality.

Thus the personality is simplified, symbolized and sharp
ened to grasp the reader. And then--as the reader moves on
through the body copy of the ad--this personality is expanded
and examined in all its appeals--an ever-enlarging pyramid of
persuasion, drawing in all the necessary information--charging
that information with desire--terminating inevitably in the one
source of satisfaction for that desire--vour product.

We will examine this concept more thoroughly in Chapter

8--on Identification.

On the Only Type of Prevention Headline That Will Sell

Many copy writers believe that no prevention headline (be
cause it treats a problem that may occur and that is not actually
plaguing your prospect at this moment) can ever be effective.
The reason they give for this failure is the inability of the prospect
to identify himself with a problem that has not already forced it
self upon him.

This is true--but only for those problems which affect him
personally. He is perfectly capable of imagining such problems
afflicting his loved ones, his friends, his wife and children, even
his nation. This is why decay-preventing toothpaste sold so well
when the ads focussed the decay, not on the parent, but on the
children. This is why life insurance can be sold, not by picturing
the prospects death, but the horrors inflicted upon his wife and
children if insufficient money is left over to take care of them.
To sum up: A man will not visualize future disasters occur
ring to himself, but he is perfectly capable of visualizing, and
buying preventatives from, the image of such future problems
affecting others around him.


SUMMARY: ': T HE ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

65

On the Selection of Splinter Markets to Avoid Competition

Throughout this book, we have assumed that each competi
tor in a market will trv to advertise to that market as a whole.
For example, that every reducing aid will try to sell all women
that are interested in losing weight.

This assumption is not necessarily true, in at least two re

spects. First, it assumes that such a market is all of one piece (for
example, that all women want to lose weight for the same reason).
Thev do not, of course. There are at least two major sub-categories
in the market--those who want to lose weight for appearance rea
sons, and those who must lose weight because of their health. The
same general appeal--LOSE WEIGHT--will be effective with
both. But certainly the mechanisms should vary--speed and ease
in the first--safetv and permanence in the second.

Secondly, a small company with a limited budget may avoid
competing with larger rivals for the core of the market, and may
concentrate its attack on a smaller segment of that market. This
is usually done regionally. But it may be even more effective if
it is based on the sociology of the market rather than its geog
raphy. For example, a reducing aid may decide to abandon the
greater appearance segment of the market, and appeal much more
specifically to the health segment. This deliberate focussing of
the appeal would alter every aspect of the campaign, from the
headline, through identification copy, through mechanism and
substantiation--right down to the selection of media and chan
nels of distribution. (Health and geriatric magazines, and distri
bution through doctors rather than drug stores.)

Eventually, of course, if the appeal is successful and the bud
get grows, then the advertiser can decide to invade the majority
market. If he does this, the success of the initial limited cam
paign can be used as a point of difference to appeal to the larger
market. For example, the fact that women who were forced to
lose weight permanently relied on this product more than twice
as often as any other, etc.


66

SUMMARY: T HE ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

In Summary

The first five chapters of this book, which vou have just fin
ished, describe a process which may take days, or weeks, or
months to complete.

This process begins with a thorough analysis of the market
for your client's product--with an attempt to measure the breadth
and depth of that market--to identify the gigantic emotional forces
that create that market--to define and focus those forces in terms
of a single image or desire or need--and to channel those forces
toward one inevitable solution--vour client's product.

In order to do this, the second step of this process involves
a meticulous study of the product itself--what it is and what it
does--the physical product that you will deliver, and the func
tional product that you will sell--all its various satisfactions and
performances--again focussed to a single image, a single identi
fication, a single claim that will tap the greatest possible emo
tional force within your market.

The combination of these first and second steps gives you
the theme of your ad--the desire your market demands and its
satisfaction . . . the need your market feels and its solution . . . the
identification your market gropes for and its expression.

And once you discover this theme, you begin the process of
expressing it. You explore the state of maturity of vour market.
You find out how much people know about vour product and
what it does--how much they've been told about similar prod
ucts--and how much they care about both.

Out of this analysis comes the point of entrv for vour head
line--the point of contact--the point of greatest interest and
acceptance on the part of your prospect. It may be located any
where--in your product itself, in its price, in its performance,
in the satisfaction your product promises, in the need vour mar
ket demands from your product, or only in the market itself.
But, wherever it is, this is the point where vou start. Here the
searching and the planning stop. Here the words begin.


SUMMARY: T HE ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

Again, this process may take weeks or even months. And at

the end of that time, you may have written five or ten words.

These five or ten words will make up about 90% of the value
of your ad. If you are right, they may start a new industry. If you
are wrong, nothing you write after them will save your ad. Copy
writing--on the idea level--is an all or nothing profession. You
build your idea, piece by piece . . . you crowd it into five or ten
words . . . and then it stands or dies by itself. And everything that
follows it, stands or dies with it. This is why we have devoted so
much time to this planning process.

And it is a process. You don't get an idea or a headline--
vou either build it, or vou unfold it, petal by petal. You dig it
out of the market research . . . vou wring it out of the product . . .
you read, you listen, you experiment for yourself. You work--
hard. You rub up against this product and this market so hard
that they seep into vour pores. And--above everything else--you
remember this cardinal ride of creativity:

What you are looking for in this product and this market is
the one element that makes them unique. The idea you want--
the headline you want--the breakthrough you want--are all
wrapped up inside that product and that market. Nowhere else.
And no outside ride--no outside formula will give them to
you. You are facing a product-market-timing relationship that
never happened before--it is unique. And the solution you need
is just as unique.

What this first part of the book has tried to give vou is not
molds, but compasses. Not formulas to copy word by word, or
rules to rigidlv follow. But rather guide-posts to set your think
ing in the right direction. Specifically and technically, these guideposts fall into two classes:

The first are analytical procedures. Their purpose is to break
down a complicated problem into its parts . .. to examine those
parts one bv one . .. to find out which is the most important--
and to start your solution from there.

Once you have done this, you then begin to build up your


68

SUMMARY: T HE ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

solution to its greatest power. You do this bv removing limiting
factors, and bv adding everything you can find that will strengthen
your idea. If we wrote literature instead of advertising, these two
processes would be called conception and execution. In copy writ
ing, we sav that we get the main theme for our ad, and then we
put it into a headline.

And when vou have finished, vou have five or ten words. If
thev are the right words, thev will be immensely valuable. But
they still will be onlv the start. Thev are the end of one road, and
the beginning of another. Thev are the imitation to vour ad--the
hand vou extend to your prospect for vour product. Your job is
now to make that introduction worth while--for both parties.

In the remainder of the book, we shall discuss the tech
niques of writing the bodv copy of vour ad. These techniques are
directed toward one end: building conviction--not onlv instilling
the desire for vour product, but actually strengthening that de
sire with the belief that that product will DO what the prospect
wants.

We now turn to this process of building vour ad, so that vour

ad builds conviction.


PART 2

THE SEVEN BASIC
TECHNIQUES OF
BREAKTHROUGH
ADVERTISING
How to write body copy
as strong as your headline


6
INSIDE YOUR PROSPECT'S
MEND--WHAT MAKES
PEOPLE READ, WANT,
BEIJEVE

You have now built vour headline.
You now have a means of stopping your prospect--of bringing
to a momentary halt all the diverse activities of his mind--of fo
cussing his attention, at least for a moment, on a single thought.
This is the job that you have designed vour headline to do--not
to sell, or identify your product, or even mention the need or
desire that your product satisfies--but simply and solelv to flag
down your prospect, and get him to read your first paragraph.

From
that moment on, your body copy does
this by altering your prospect's vision of reality.

does
a new world for your prospect--a world
emerges as
man

the fulfillment of the dominant desire

the selling.

It
It creates
in which your product
that caused this

to respond to your headline.
To create this world, your copy must expand or alter one
or more of the three dimensions of his alreadv-existing mental
world. This is the task of the remainder of your ad. Your copv

71


lA

INSIDE YOUR PROSPECT'S MIND

must be long enough to accomplish this change--and the length
of your ad will depend on three factors:

First, how much copy you need to build his desire for that
product--and everything that product can do for him--to its
greatest possible strength.

Second, how much additional copy you need to make him
feel both comfortable and complimented bv that product, to en
able him to visualize that product as a part of the life structure
that he has built, and is building, for himself.

And, finally, how much additional copy vou need to make
him believe what you have said--to compensate for his alreadyexisting prejudices and beliefs.

The answers to these three questions determine not onlv the
length of your ad, but also its structure, its development, its
style and its pace. Each of these questions relates to a separate
dimension of your prospect's mind--different wavs he has of ar
ranging thoughts and feelings. In this chapter, we will examine
these three dimensions briefly, and sketch in what wavs, and to
what extent, you can alter or expand them through vour ad. And
then, in the following chapters, we will detail these mechanisms
of persuasion thoroughly along with the most effective techniques
of presenting them.

And then, in the last chapter, we will trv to weave them
together into a simple, straight-line, logical progression of images
--leading your reader from the headline, through the product, to
the actual purchase.

Let us start with these three dimensions of thought and

feeling:

These are the wants, needs, cravings, thirsts, hungers, lusts,
etc. that drive your prospect through life. They are physical--such
as the desire to be thin, or strong, or healthy, or free from acne,
corns, bad breath or what have vou. Thev are material--such as

1. Desires


INSIDE YOUR PROSPECT'S MIND

73

the desire to possess monev, or a big car, or a beautiful dress.
Thev are sensual--such as the thirst for a cold glass of beer, or
the need for a tired bodv to stretch out on a soft bed.

They have, of course, tremendous driving power. And thev
already exist. You cannot create them, diminish them, or battle
them. But you can expand them, sliarpen them, channel them,
and give them a goal. And this is vour primary task as a copy
writer.

Your first task--and in some ads vour only task--is to make

vour prospect want. To sharpen his desire. To picture every mo
ment of its fulfillment. To let him see it, feel it, touch it, sit in
it, listen to his friends rave about it. To make him visualize the
wonderful new world your product offers him so strongly that he
practically lives in it--and then to offer him that product. The
method of doing this--Intensification--will be discussed in the
next chapter.

2. Identifications

These are the roles vour prospect wants to play in life, and
the personality traits he wants vour product to help him build,
or project.

These longings for identification--longings for a sharplydefined personality--longings for social status--are, of course, not
materia] or physical or sensual at all. Thev complement and in
tensify the physical desires--add another dimension to them--
bv making each purchase serve a double duty. Thus, not only
does a woman buy a low-calorie food to become thin, but in so
doing she also builds again a radiant, attractive, youthful per
sonality. And not only does a man buy a car for the power, speed
and transportation it will give him, but equally as much for the
projection of prestige, success and readv-cash-to-burn that this
purchase communicates to his neighbors.

Call them what you will--goals, hopes, dreams, ambitions,
envies, admirations, phantasies or objectives--these subtle, svm-


INSIDE YOUR P R O S P E C TS MIND

bolic, never-openly-spoken projections of our own self-images are
immensely powerful sales forces. Your task is to put them directly
behind your product. To make him feel the prestigious and se
lect group he joins when he becomes a user of that product. To
picture for him the people who live in vour product's world todav.

3. Beliefs

These are the opinions, attitudes, prejudices, fragments of
knowledge and conceptions of reality that vour prospect lives bv.
This is the world of emotionalized reason that he inhabits--the
way he accepts or rejects facts and builds up his universe, the
types of thinking he uses to arrive at decisions, the ideas and val
ues which give him comfort and which he believes are perma
nent and true.

These ideas may be shallow or profound, valid or false, per
fectly logical or mere wishful thinking. But it is not advertising's
mission to argue with them. And no one advertiser can change
them. Advertising is not education; it does not have societv as its
sponsor, nor does it have the vears of time that are given to ed
ucation to produce results.

Advertising, like science, must accept reality as it exists, not
as it might wish it to exist. Only then can it alter reality--not bv
smashing into it head-on--but bv exploiting its tendencies and
giving direction to its energies.

Believing is a process--a process of fitting new facts into
certain established patterns of thought and conviction. People be
lieve in certain ways. These beliefs form a filter through which
your product-information must pass or be rejected. And their
already-established patterns of reasoning create habit-channels
along which your copy must build its conviction--or die.

You start with these beliefs as a base. You build up from them

by using his kind of logic, not vour own, to prove that vour prod
uct satisfies his desires--to prove that your product works--to


INSIDE YOUR PROSPECT S MIND

prove that his kind of people rely on your product--to prove that
no other product satisfies his needs as well.

The mechanisms for doing this are shown in Chapters 9

and 10.

There you have them. Desires. . . . Identifications. . . . Beliefs.
Each of them composed of equal parts of emotion and thought.
The three dimensions of vour prospect's mind--the raw mate
rials with which you will work.

To study them, we shall deal with each of them separatelv.
But, in actually writing your ad, of course, you will weave them
into each other--to create a simple, fluid path of thought from
the beginning to the end of vour ad. This technique--Blending
and Reinforcement--will be the subject of Chapter 14.


7

THE FIRST TECHNIQUE
OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY:
INTENSIFICATION

Thirteen Ways to Strengthen Desire

The force that creates sales, that
powers our present economy, is desire. Mass Desire, spread among
millions of men and women. And the art of salesmanship, fun
damentally and primarily, is expanding this desire. Expanding it
horizontally, among more and more people. Expanding it verti
cally by sharpening and magnifying it--by building it to such a
pitch that it overcomes the obstacles of skepticism, lethargy and
price, and results in the sale.

Advertising is salesmanship in print. Therefore, above every
thing else, advertising is the literature of desire. It is society's en
cyclopedia of dreams . . . our twentieth-century Wish Book. Adver
tising giy es form and content to desire. It provides it with a goal.
These desires, as they exist in the mind of vour prospect
today, are indistinct. They are blurs--hazy, ambiguous, not yet


F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

crystallized into words or images. In most cases, tliev are simply
vague emotions, without compulsion or direction. And as such,
they have only a fraction of their true potential power.

Your job is to fill out these vague desires with concrete im
ages--to show your prospect every possible way that they can be
fulfilled--to multiply their strength by the number of satisfactions
that you can suggest to achieve them.

A copy writer's first qualifications are imagination and en
thusiasm. You are literally the script writer for vour prospect's
dreams. You are the chronicler of his future. Your job is to show
him in minute detail all the tomorrows that vour product makes
possible for him.

This is the core of advertising--its fundamental function. To
take unformulated desire, and translate it into one vivid scene of
fulfillment after another. To add the appeal of concrete satisfac
tion after satisfaction to the basic drive of that desire. To make
sure that your prospect realizes everything that he is getting--
everything that he is now leaving behind him--everything that
he may possibly be missing.

The sharper you can draw vour pictures--and the greater
the number of them that you can legitimately present--the more
your prospect will demand your product, and the less important
will seem your price.

How much space can you give to this process of Intensifica
tion? This depends on two factors--the amount of space allotted
to you for the entire ad, and the number of wavs vou can present
your images without giving the feeling of repetition or boredom.
First of all, different media demand different treatments. For
example, catalogs, small-space newspaper and magazine adver
tising, radio and television strictly limit the number of words
given to you to draw your images. To fit vour message into their
structures, you must use either or both of two techniques. The
first is compression--the boiling down of projections and images
into a few key words. And the second is the campaign--the rep
etition of these key words over and over again--along with a


F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

79

progression of embellishments and differentiations--through an
entire series of advertisements.

We shall see how this is done, in detail, at the end of this

chapter.

On the other hand, large-space newspaper and magazine ad
vertising and especially direct mail give you adequate room, in
most cases, to present a full story In these media, the decision
as to length depends far more on the second factor--the num
ber of ways you can present your images without giving the feel
ing of repetition or boredom.

No matter what you do, your prospect will take with him
only one basic idea, one dominant image from vour ad. But with
every additional new and different wav that vou can present that
idea, it becomes sharper and more real in vour prospect's mind,
and it builds up more and more emotional weight.

Thus the problem becomes one of perspective, of fresh view
points, of new and different detail. Of walking around vour prod
uct in your imagination, and presenting it to your prospect in
ever}* way in which it enters his life.

You are working against two opposing forces. The first, as in
your headline, is the amount of material which has already been
presented to your prospect about similar products in other ads.
There are stages of market sophistication to be dealt with in bodv
copy as well as in your headline. If your prospect has read the
same phraseology before, he will be bored bv it, no matter where
he encounters it again.

And the second obstacle is the phraseology of vour own ad.
Once you have presented your basic fulfillment in a certain wav;
then you must vary your viewpoint in your second description,
or not present it again. Otherwise you will lose vour reader in
the middle of vour ad.

You cannot repeat, but you can reinforce. And every time
the same basic promise is given a fresh setting for vour prospect,
it reinforces the descriptions that went before it, and makes vour
prospect that much more determined to participate.


80

F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

The presenting of a series of fresh, new and different ful
fillments for your prospects dominant desire--our first mecha
nism of persuasion--is called Intensification. It takes many forms,
with many more certainly to be inyented. We will list some of
them here, giving the complete copy examples to show how thev
have been worked out to deal with specific copy problems.

Our illustrations in this part of the book will be drawn mostly
from mail order. The reason for this is simple. Mail order ad
vertising must accomplish its sale from a single ad, without rely
ing on the cumulative force of the campaign, and without help
from product display or salespeople. Therefore, mail order tries
to present as much of the complete story as possible at one time.
These same techniques apply equally well to all forms of adver
tising. But there the}- are usually quite compressed, and their
purpose and structure was not quite so apparent.
Here are these techniques of Intensification:

Your First Presentation of Your Claims

1. First present
rectly--bluntly--by a
its appearance or the results it gives. For example, this rose ad:

it gives di
the product or the satisfaction
thorough, completely detailed description of

MORE ROSES THAN YOU EVER SAW
ON ANY ROSE BUSH . . .

Leading Eastern Agricultural College reports: This fab
ulous rose variety produced 500 blooms in June . . . 1523
more blooms in July. . . 1616 more blooms in August. . .
437 more blooms in September . . . 4,076 rases all from one
single plant. . .

Can you imagine the fantastic beauty of a rosebush
that can easily give you MORE THAN 4,000 ROSES from
June to September--and then keeps on blooming heavily
right up into frost . . .

Can you imagine the fantastic thrill of walking into
your garden and actually picking 3 dozen, even 4 dozen


F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

81

roses a day from a single plant, dav after day, week alter
week--and still leave gigantic clusters of bloom on each
single plant.

Colorful, fragrant roses almost as large as the most ex
pensive Hvbrid Teas, vet blooming bv the hundreds at one
single time . .. on one single bush! Cherrv-pink 3-inch roses
overlaid with tinges ol red that deepen in fire and bril
liance as the blossoms unfold--to reveal a dazzling gold
splash on their petals! Roses that burst into living walls of
blossoms that flame again and again into exquisite masses
of bloom in June, Julv, August, September, October, No
vember . . . and often stav in bloom weeks after the first
snows have fallen! . . .

This is the rose with such fantastic blooming power
that it will actually give vou huge clusters of 10, 12 even
15 flowers on a single stem . . . and produce those clusters
in solid masses of bloom! Clusters as large as both of your
outstretched hands put together . . . clusters that actuallv
measure up to one full foot across . . . each stem a com
plete floral bouquet in itself. . . that gives vou an average
of more than 50 NEW ROSES dav after dav, week after
week, for 8, 9 even 10 weeks in a row during the hot "dog
davs" of summer. . . Enough roses to fill everv room in
vour house with color and fragrance all summer long . . .
Enough roses to drench vour terrace with beautv, to sweep
around vour home and flood vour beds, vour borders, vour
walks, vour driveway with solid, living walls of roses all
summer long . . . with just a few plants!

And this is the rose you can have blooming in vour
garden now and for years to come, that will make vour
if
grounds the garden showplaee of the neighborhood,
vou accept this extraordinary flower offer now! . . .

Or, as another example, this description of the results of a
Christmas flashlight projector that shows colored slides of the
Bible:

. . . You take out the amazing invention we send vou.
You simplv switch it on. And suddenly even/ person in the
room draws in his breath in excitement and admiration!


82

F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

For there before vou on that living room wall--pro
jected four feet wide bv three feet tall--is one of the most
beautiful pictures you have ever seen! Before vour eves--
so real that you can praeticallv reach out and touch her--
is the Virgin Mary holding the Infant Jesus in her arms.
The picture actually glows with exquisite color. You can see
every magnificent detail . . . the animals huddled around the
manger . . . the tenderness in the Virgins eves . . . the smile
on the Infant's face.

It's almost as though you were actuallv there! Sud
denly all the wonderful tales your children have heard . . .
all the meaning and glorv of Christmas . . . come alive be
fore your children's eves! Life-sized . .. as tall as vour chil
dren . . . scene after scene parades before them on their
living room wall! They actuallv see the Angel of God an
nouncing the Birth to the Shepherds! Thev witness the
Star of Bethlehem rising over the world! Thev stand side
by side with the Three Wise men in silent adoration!

Before their very eyes, thev see Christ grow to ma
turity. They watch him astound the elders of the Temple
as a small child. They thrill to his first meeting with John
the Baptist. They are present at the Sermon on the Mount.
They witness each of the miracles--see with their own eves
Jesus calming the storm . . . teaching Peter to walk on the
water . . . raising Lazarus from the dead.

Can there be any more thrilling experience? Suddenly
every sermon thev have ever heard . . . overv book thev
have ever read . . . every prayer they have ever learned,
takes on new meaning and beauty for them. This is prob
ably the most thrilling hour you will ever spend with vour
children. They will ask you to repeat it time and time again.
These magnificent pictures will continue to thrill and as
tound and instruct them for years to come . . .

Or, as another example, this description of the outward ap

pearance of a giant flying plastic model jet:

. . . Yes! Just imagine the expression on vour children's
faces, when they walk into vour living room just one week
from today, and suddenly see this magnificent model air
plane standing in front of them on the living room table!


F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: I N T E N S I F IC

83

Here is a gigantic, three-dimensional, all plastic model
airplane--resting securely on its own triple landing gear--
and so huge that its tail section alone stands six full rnehes
from the table!

This magnificent model airplane proudly bears the
official colors of Pan American Airways! Its wings and en
gines are a dazzling silver! Its fuselage is a gleaming white--
with a brilliant blue stripe stretching back twentv-one inches
along the entire length of the bodv! And stamped on both
sides of the huge rudder is the Fan American World Globe--
and the American flag above it. ready to identify this plane
anywhere she goes!

Both the wings and the tail section are slanted diag
onally back--ready to cut through the air at 600 scale miles
an hour! And suspended beneath the wings are the four
huge engines--each as long and as thick as vour child's
fingers--each with its own JET SOUND SIMULATOR, to
give your child thrill after thrill after thrill WHEN HE
ACTUALLY FLIES THIS BREATH-TAKING MODEL
HIMSELF! . .

Put the Claims in Action

to expand the

2. Now that you have presented your main description, you
image. One of the most effective ways
are ready
to do this is to PUT THE PRODUCT IN ACTION for your reader.
To show, not only how
it
gives the reader, hut exactly how it does this. As one example,
let's continue with our model jet airplane ad:

the product looks, and what benefits

No Fuel! No Danger! No Crack-Ups! Yet It Flies 600
Scale Miles An Hour, All Under Your Complete Control!
Pick this magnificent plastic model up from the table.
and hand it to your child. While he holds it, simply attach
the U-Control Line as we show vou to the left wing. Then
suspend the model from this control line, and begin slowlv
to swing it through the air. Before your astonished eyes.
you will see one of the most thrilling sights of vour entire
life!


84

F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

This model is perfectly designed for high-speed flight!
As soon as it picks up power from the motion of vour hand,
it will lift up its nose, its wings will begin to cut through
the air, it will flash upward and streak ahead of vou! As vou
give it more and more line, it will turn wider and wider.
fly faster and faster . . . You can flv it in circles only five feet
wide, or you can take it outdoors and flv it in gigantic arcs
one hundred feet wide--the size of an entire eitv lot . . .

You can make this plane soar upward--stall at fantas
tic heights--dive toward the ground--and then pick up
speed and flash upward again in a breath-taking rescue! . . .
You can spiral this magnificent model down into a perfect
landing! You can fly two or more planes in formation! You
can have jet races! You can have an entire fleet of breath
taking models flown by every member of vour family--and
you can have them for only $1 apiece--less than ONEFIFTH the price you'd pay for a plastic model of this size
and performance! . . .

Or, as another example, this product-in-action description

from a brochure selling a self-propelled fish lure:

. . . Think of it! To fuel up this amazing, live-action
lure, all vou do is this. Simply snap open the fuel cham
ber--pour in the absolutely harmless fuel--and close the
fuel chamber again! . . . Simply cast or lower that powerpacked lure into fresh or salt water--and get set for the
fishing thrill of your life!

For perhaps one minute, the lure will float quietly on
the surface of the water. But then that water will reach the
fuel charge inside--the lure will seem to shudder for a sec
ond--and then it will spring dramatically to "life"!

The air around it will be filled with the buzzing sound
of a dying bee! Instantly, the nose of the lure will point
downward, and it will begin its first descent! Slowly, jerk
ily, like a maimed minnow, it will swim noisily down
ward--buzzing and humming--traveling about nine feet
every fifteen seconds! If no fish intercepts it, it will then
automatically stop its descent--slowly raise up its nose--
and begin its irresistible climb to the surface again!


F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: I N T E N S I F I C A T I ON

85

And again! And again! Tirelessly--hour after hour--
lengthening out the reach of vour own casts! Roaming rest
lessly oyer eyerv foot of water beneath vou--even on a
slack line--e\*en when your boat is tied up--eyen when
you're curled up on the dock, sound asleep! . . .

And driving the fish around you into such a frenzy
with its swimming and its buzzing that they practically tear
the rod out of vour hands--they're so anxious to get their
mouths into the hook! . . .

Bring In the Reader

3. Or, if vour product lends itself to this kind of treatment,
the middle of this product-in-action
put your reader right smack in
story, and give him a verbal demonstration of icJiat will happen
to him the first day he owns that product. For example, this pas
sage from an ad selling a power booster for the average car:

. . . Picture this to yourself! Next weekend vou go

down to vour car--the same tired car that you've been driv
ing for years. You've made only one simple change to that
car, so easy that vour sixteen year old son could do it. But
now, when you turn on the ignition, a modern miracle of
engineering science comes to life under your hood!

From the very first moment, you'll see and feel the
difference in that engine! . . . When vou release the emer
gency brake, vour car will glide out of its parking space--
roll down the street with vour foot hardlv touching the gas
pedal. Every 30 or 40 seconds, you'll give that car an extra
shot of gas--feeling it spurt ahead--testing the new power
that's singing underneath vour foot!

We ask vou to pull up to another car at the stop light,
of approximately the same year and make as your own!
Wait until the light changes from red to green. Let the
other car start first. Wait till the other car gets half way
across the street. And then slam your foot down on the gas
pedal!

Before that other car has even crossed the street, vou
will have caught up with him. For one brief second, vou
and that other car will race fender to fender. And then vou


86

F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: I N T E N S I F I C A T I ON

will flash away from him . . . you will leave him a full block
behind . . . you will look in your rear view mirror and see
the startled look of amazement on the other drivers face! . . .

Show Him H ow to Test Your Claims

4. But there is still more room to expand the image along

the demonstration

test. Let your reader
these lines. Turn
the performance of your product--gain
visualize himself proving
the most specific and dramatic
ing
way possible. For example, in this ad, selling a new kind of spark
plug:

immediately--in

its benefits

into a

. . . when you get your set of SA FIRE L\"JECTORS,
here is all you do. If you have an automatic transmission,
make a note of how fast your car crawls forward when it
is in the drive position, with the motor idling. If vou have
a sports car, a racing car or boat, make a note of the RPM's
as indicated on the tachometer when the engine is idling.
If you have regular transmission, put your car in low gear
on a level road and notice its speed with the motor idling.
Next . . . screw your injectors right into the spark plug open
ings

...
Now, if you have an automatic transmission--put vour
car in drive and let your engine idle. If vour car stood still
with spark plugs, it will now move forward at from 4 to 6
miles an hour; that means that the amount of gas that just
kept your engine turning over will now carrv vou up to 6
miles at no cost to you.

If you have a racing or sports car or a boat with a
tachometer, your RPM's will increase up to 200 more at
idling and up to 300 more at high speeds.

If you have regular transmission, in low gear with vour
motor idling your car will move forward 4 to 6 miles per
hour faster. In other words, no matter what vou drive, here
is absolute proof that you can go further, faster and
c h e a p e r . ..


F I R ST T E C H N I Q UE OF B R E A K T H R O U GH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

8/

Or, as another example, this demonstration-test from an ad

selling a memory course, with the headline, "Give Me One Eve
ning and I'll Give vou a Push-Button Memory":

. . . Take this book and turn to page 39. Read eight
short pages--no more. And then, put down the book. Re
view in vour own mind the one simple secret I've shown
vou. And then--get readv to test your new AUTOMATIC
memorv!

What vou are going to do, in that very first evening,
is this. Without referring to the book, you are going to sit
down, and you are going to write--not five, not ten, but
TWENTY important facts that vou have never been able
to memorize before! If vou are a business man, they may
be customers' orders that you have received . .. if you are
a salesman, they may be twenty different products in your
line . .. if vou are a housewife, they. . . .

In any case, vou are simplv going to glance over that
list again for a few moments. You are going to perform a
simple mental trick on each one of these facts--that will
burn that fact into vour mind, permanently and automati
cally! And then vou are going to put that list away . . .

And the next morning, vou are going to amaze your
friends and family! When vou go down to business, you
will attend to everyone of those orders--automatically--
without referring to vour memo pad!. . . .

Yes! And you'll amaze vour friends by remembering
every product in vour line--backwards and forwards--in
the exact order that vou memorized them! You'll keep every7
single appointment on time--because one appointment will
automatically flash into vour mind after another--at the
precise moment vou need them--exactly as though you
pushed a mental button!

All this--in a single evening!. . . .

Stretch Out Your Benefits in Time

5. The number of variations, of fresh, startling viewpoints is
endless. Here is another departure from the product-in-action
theme: showing the product at work, not for just an hour or a


88

F I R