

To understand how it works, let's take another page out of the
storyteller's playbook. When screenwriters pitch their screenplays to
studio executives, the difference between being accepted or rejected
often comes down to what's called a logline.

A logline is simply a movie's one-sentence description. A strong
logline will help the screenwriter sell the screenplay and will continue
to be used all the way through a movie's opening weekend so that
promoters can sell it to moviegoing audiences. If you've ever
scrolled through a movie app on your phone or scrolled through
Netflix looking for something to watch, chances are you've read a
logline. Here are a few examples:

"A precocious private high school student whose life revolves
around his school competes with its most famous and
successful alumnus for the affection of a first-grade teacher."
--Rushmore

"Blacksmith Will Turner teams up with eccentric pirate
'Captain' Jack Sparrow to save his love, the governor's
daughter, from Jack's former pirate allies, who are now
undead."

--Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl

"A science-fiction fantasy about a naive but ambitious farm
boy from a backwater desert who discovers powers he never
knew he had when he teams up with a feisty princess, a
mercenary space pilot, and an old wizard warrior to lead a
ragtag rebellion against the sinister forces of the evil Galactic
Empire."

--Star Wars: A New Hope

"An incompetent, immature, and dimwitted heir to an autoparts factory must save the business to keep it out of the
hands of his new con-artist relatives."

--Tommy Boy


What makes these loglines complete and effective? Two things:
clarity and promise. A logline is designed to summarize the story in a
way that a reader understands the plot (and thus the entertainment
value of the story) and desires to know more. In other words, the
reader of the logline clearly understands what the movie is about
and believes the promise that it will provide entertainment or
inspiration.

The one-liner you will create for your company will work like a
logline for a movie: it will clearly communicate your offer and
promise a solution to your customer's problem. And, not unlike a
logline, your one-liner will make people want to buy your product.
Not only this, but your one-liner can be used to convert your entire
team into a sales force. Whether it's your customer service reps,
your assembly-line team, or your company's president, every
member of your team should know your one-liner so that if anybody
asks them about the business, they can describe it in such a way
that customers clearly understand why they need your products and
services.

What would life look like if everybody you worked with were
converted into a salesforce spreading the word about your products
and services? Creating a one-liner and having everybody repeat it
over and over is a great way to spread word about the value of your
products and services.

To craft a compelling one-liner, we'll employ a sound bite that
comes from a distilled version of the StoryBrand framework. While a
StoryBrand BrandScript has seven parts, a one-liner has three parts:
the problem, the product as solution, and the result.

Your one-liner doesn't have to be a single sentence, nor does it
need to be four sentences. Think of it more as a statement. You
simply want to communicate these four ideas: Who is your
customer? What is their problem? What is your plan to help them?
What will their life look like after you do?

Let's take a deeper look at each of the three necessary

components:

As I said earlier in the book, stories become interesting when the
hero wants something and encounters conflict in their journey to get


what they want, so if we want to get people interested in our brand,
we should open our remarks by identifying our customer's conflict.
For example, which of these statements makes the product sound
more interesting?

Option one: Our new toothpaste is gentle on teeth and gums.
Option two: Many people have sensitive teeth and gums and
teeth. Our new

experience pain when brushing
toothpaste is gentle on teeth and gums.

their

The second option starts with the problem and then positions the
product as the solution to the problem. Most people, and certainly
most people who have this problem, would find the second sound
bite much more intriguing. The point: the problem is the hook.

Starting your one-liner with the problem that is bothering your
customer will trigger the mental response we are looking for. When
we start with the problem, the customer thinks to themselves: Yeah,
I do struggle with that. Tell me more.

HERE ARE SOME EXAMPLES OF PROBLEMS DIFFERENT BRANDS CAN
TALK ABOUT:
If you're a busy mom and can't find time to work out, then . . .
If your dog barks loudly whenever somebody knocks on the door,

then . . .

If you want the benefits of an electric vehicle but worry about

range, then . . .

After you state the problem your customers experience, your
customers will lean in. Next, we want to position our product,
service, or idea as the solution to the problem, thus offering a
resolution to the story loop we just opened by talking about the
problem.

Now that we've clearly stated the problem, let's position our
product as the solution. This should be a very, very simple addition
to the one-liner. Simply state: "That's why we created X" and stop


talking. When creating a one-liner, clients will often ramble on and
on about their product, about its features and benefits and so on.
This is a mistake. When you simply state the name or short
description of the product, you resolve the open story loop and
satisfy the customer's curiosity, but when you ramble on and on, you
actually dilute the value of your product. For example, compare:
"Many people find it difficult to fall asleep at night because they are
stressed. Our meditation is based on science and over twenty years
of research, relieving the central nervous system by triggering
natural calming agents that are released through breath work,
mental focus and . . ." with this statement: "Many people find it
difficult to fall asleep at night because they are stressed. Our simple
meditation helps you fall asleep fast."

Certainly the first statement is interesting, but it also wanders
into the weeds. That's fine if your customer is ready to be
enlightened, but enlightening your customer isn't the job of the oneliner. The one-liner's purpose is to pique curiosity so that people will
want to either buy your product or seek enlightenment about why
they should buy it. Your one-liner will be more effective if you keep
the "product as solution" portion as short as possible.

The third and final sound bite you want to include in your oneliner is the result your customer will experience if they buy your
product. Use this portion of your one-liner to cast a vision for your
customer's future, thus giving them a picture of the life they could
have once their problem is resolved. Human beings move toward a
positive vision of their future, but only if that vision is described
clearly. For example: "More and more people want to know where
their beef comes from because industrialized ranching practices can
leave toxins in our food, often triggering food allergies. Regenerative
ranching practices ensure animals are toxin-free, which means you
don't struggle with food allergies and feel much better over time."

Keep Editing Your One-Liner Until It Works

Consider your first one-liner a rough draft. Write it down and test
it repeatedly. Run it by your friends, spouse, potential customers,


even strangers standing in line at Starbucks. Do people look
interested? Do they completely understand what you offer? If so,
you're on the right track. When they start asking for your business
card or for more information, you've really dialed it in.

STEP THREE: WIREFRAME AN EFFECTIVE LANDING
PAGE

As I mentioned in the last chapter, your website or landing page
should be the best and clearest version of your sales pitch. To
achieve that, use each section of your landing page to invite
customers further and further into a story that piques their curiosity,
enlightens them, and challenges them to make a commitment.

Of the tens of thousands of websites our StoryBrand certified
coaches have created for their clients, these are the sections of a
website or landing page that have proven to be the most effective.

If you have an e-commerce site selling dozens or hundreds of
products, use these sections to explain your overall brand. You can
then create a landing page like this for each of your individual
products or services.

THE HEADER

The header is the part of your website that sits "above the fold,"
meaning at the top of the page. The job of the header is to explain
your offer so clearly and in such simple language that your customer
wants to know more. If you've used the right text, your customer
will want to keep scrolling to "enlighten themselves" about all that
you offer.

A good header will include a large-text offer, a transitional call to
action, a direct call to action, and, if you like, a value stack (a few
additional bullet points that build on your initial offer). Here is an
example:


THE STAKES

The stakes section of your website is where you put the negative
consequences of not doing business with you. We like this section
near the top because, as you remember, the problem is the hook.
Your stakes section can be developed as a paragraph, images, bullet
points, or even a video. Here is a simple example:

THE VALUE PROPOSITION


Since you went negative at the top, let's quickly swing back to
positive. Humans love it when a story swings back and forth
between happy and hard moments, so employ that technique here.
In this section, you'll use a paragraph or some bullet points or even
a testimonial to reiterate the value you can offer a customer. In a
way, this section will be a wordier version of the header, meaning it's
a slightly more elaborated version of your offer. Here's an example:

GUIDE

Now that you've invited customers into a story, introduce
yourself. After all, at this point, you've likely earned the right to be
heard. In this section, you want to position yourself or your brand as
the guide the hero needs in order to solve their problem and win the
day. Remember, in this section you want to communicate empathy
and demonstrate competency. Here is an example:


THE PLAN

At this point in looking at your landing page, many customers will
want to place an order, but they aren't going to. The reason?
Cognitive dissonance. Something still feels confusing to them.
Mostly, they wonder how the process is going to work or exactly how
they will make this change in their lives. Rather than sending them
away to "think about it," let's give them a three-step plan. Here is an
example:

THE EXPLANATORY PARAGRAPH

Customers often want to do due diligence before placing an
if you're selling something complicated or

order, especially


expensive. Giving your customers a few paragraphs to read about
your product or service, though, allows them to spend a little time
reflecting on your offer. We call this the explanatory paragraph, and
it can look like this:

LEAD GENERATOR AD

You definitely want to share your lead generator in a pop-up ad
of some sort, but you can also repeat it in the actual body of the
landing page. Mentioning your lead generator twice will actually
encourage even greater sign-ups. Here's a good one:


THE JUNK DRAWER

I used to joke that the junk drawer is the most important section
of your website because it's where you are going to put everything
you previously thought was important. Don't bother cluttering up
your sales page with all kinds of links and background information
about your brand. Instead, put that stuff down here at the bottom of
the page.

You can add or subtract from this wireframe if you like.
Regardless, using the StoryBrand Brain at StoryBrand.AI to generate
a sample landing page for your brand will help you see a terrific,
visual "sales pitch" for your offering. Have fun creating yours!


STEP FOUR: CREATE A LEAD GENERATOR THAT
COLLECTS EMAIL ADDRESSES AND PHONE
NUMBERS

There is no question people are addicted to their phones. It's a sad
reality but a reality all the same. We are all staring at our phones all
the time. Why? Not just because developers are making their apps
more and more addictive but also because it's our primary
communication device. If you are like me, you likely interact with ten
or twenty times as many people through your phone in a given day
as you do in person. In fact, if you send me a text message, you are
communicating with me in the same medium as my family and
closest friends. And, more often than not, I've invited you to do so.

If I give you my phone number for text updates, or my email
address so that I can be notified about special offers, I've literally
told you to reach out to me because I like your brand that much.

Brands that reach out to their customers via text and email have
a strategic advantage over those who do not, mainly because brands
that do so are less likely to be forgotten.

The challenge is convincing customers to give us their contact
information. So how do we get people to join our email list or give
us that valuable information? We offer them something in return,
something more valuable than the vague offer of a newsletter or an
invitation to "stay in touch." This "something" is a lead generator, a
resource that magnetically attracts people to our businesses and
invites them to take action. In the StoryBrand framework, we call
this a transitional call to action. A transitional call to action, if you
remember, is like asking potential customers out on a date. We're
not asking them to commit to marriage, but we are asking them to
spend a little more time with us.

How to Create an Irresistible Lead Generator

In order to combat noise in today's marketplace, your lead

generator must do two things:


1. Provide enormous value for your customer
2. Establish you as an authority in your field

As I mentioned before, in the year we started StoryBrand, our
first lead generator was a simple, downloadable document (in PDF
format) called "5 Things Your Website Should Include." It was
remarkably successful. More than forty thousand people downloaded
it, which allowed me to email reminders about our upcoming
StoryBrand Marketing Workshops. I credit that single lead generator
with taking our company past the $2 million mark. From there, we
created a free video series called The 5-Minute Marketing Makeover
(5MinuteMarketingMakeover.com), which took our lead generation to
another level. We were no longer grinding to create business. Now
we create lead generators for each revenue stream our company
offers. This allows us to segment our customers by their interests
and offer different products to solve their various problems.

There are endless options for creating lead generators. Our
StoryBrand coaches have been incredibly creative at producing lead
generators that offer valuable information in exchange for an email
address. Of all the lead generators our coaches have created for
clients, there are five kinds that are the most effective.

Five Types of Lead Generators for All Types of Businesses

1. Downloadable guide: This is a shockingly inexpensive way
to generate leads, and it's what we used when launching
StoryBrand. Get specific. If you're a local market selling
produce, offer monthly recipes or tips for tending a garden.
2. Online course or webinar: Creating a brief online course
or webinar is involved, but it's also easier than ever. If you're
an expert on something and want to position yourself as such
in the marketplace, offer a free training online in exchange
for an email address. By doing so, you'll have positioned
yourself as an expert, created reciprocity, and earned your
customer's trust.


3. Software demos or a free trial: This has worked wonders
for many businesses. Remember in the early nineties when
AOL sent demo CDs in the mail with one thousand hours of
free internet browsing for forty-five days? They worked like a
charm. The internet has changed since then, but the
marketing principle remains the same.

4. Free samples: My wife, Betsy, orders ready-to-cook meals
from a business called Blue Apron. To generate more leads,
Blue Apron credits her with "free sample meals" she can send
to friends and family. A number of them try it, and they end
up buyers.

5. Live events: If you've ever walked into a large pet store like
Petco, you've likely seen invitations to free dog obedience
classes. Even if you're a smaller operation, hosting a
quarterly class is a terrific way to build a small database of
qualified customers.

Still Stuck? Swipe Ideas from These Examples

One key to having an effective lead generator is giving it an
irresistible title. These are some sample lead generators I've seen
that worked well. There's no need to reinvent the wheel. Leverage
these proven examples and create something similar.

"Five Mistakes People Make with Their First Million

Dollars" --A downloadable PDF guide offered by a financial
adviser who wanted to find young, newly wealthy clients and
help them with their financial planning.

"Building Your Dream Home: Ten Things to Get Right

Before You Build" --A free e-book offered by an architect
who wanted to establish herself as a guide to families looking
to build a custom home.

"Cocktail Club: Learn to Make One New Cocktail Each

Month" --This was a monthly event surprisingly put on by a
garden store that taught attendees how to infuse bitters and
simple syrups with herbs. The objective for this promotion


was to create a community around their store. Business is
booming (or should I say blooming) because people want to
attend their classes.

"Become a Professional Speaker" --A free online course

offered by a speaking coach for those who wanted to become
professional speakers. This generated leads for long-term
subscriptions to his coaching service.

The ideas go on and on. Now that you're aware of how lead
generators work and which ones work best, you'll see them
everywhere. Keep a running list of lead generator possibilities. If one
strikes you as exceptionally strong, get to work and create a version
of your own. The key here is to avoid falling into "paralysis by
analysis." The best and easiest place to start is with a downloadable
PDF guide. If you aren't a writer, don't worry. There are plenty of
writers for hire, and you can find some terrific StoryBrand certified
coaches through our directory at MarketingMadeSimple.com.

You can also use the StoryBrand Brain at StoryBrand.AI. When
you use the tool you will be given a list of possible lead generator
titles and the copy you can use in the lead generator itself.

STEP FIVE: CREATE AN AUTOMATED EMAIL OR
TEXT DRIP CAMPAIGN

In my mid-twenties, after traveling around the country for about a
year in a Volkswagen van, I got a warehouse job at a publishing
company outside Portland, Oregon. The job came to me by accident.
A friend's dad owned the company and knew I needed a job. But I'm
grateful. Working in publishing, even in an entry-level position,
helped me fall in love with the process of making and selling books
and, later, writing them myself.

Within a few years of getting that job, I was put in charge of the
company. It was an unintentional move on the owner's part because


other employees retired or took other jobs, and the owner kept
"temporarily" moving me up. One season, though, the owner hired a
consultant to help him figure out how to grow the business, and
after studying the numbers, the consultant pointed at me and said,
"Put that guy on commission and let him do what he wants." I was
just as taken aback as my boss. Without any of us realizing it, the
company had actually started growing while I was at the helm. And
when we sat down and looked closely at the numbers, we realized
the reason. I assure you, it had little to do with my competence at
the time.

Just before my series of promotions, I'd discovered a piece of
software called FileMaker Pro. We used this software to manage our
database and collect orders. Every day I'd show up at the office and
fiddle with the software, and one day I realized we could use it to
see who had placed the largest orders and automate the creation of
a mailing list and subsequent thank-you letters. This is all standard
marketing these days, but back then it was relatively new
technology. Each month I sent about two hundred letters to the
businesses that ordered the most copies of our books. That simple
gesture generated a great deal of trust and differentiated us from
other publishers, which, according to our consultant, generated a
great deal more business.

Honestly, the letters I wrote to our customers weren't very good.
One of the letters was about a camping trip I'd taken as a kid!
Shakespearean prose, this was not.

These days my letters get a lot bigger response, but looking
back, even those terrible letters worked to grow our business. In
fact, I doubt many of our customers even read those letters.

So why did the company grow if people weren't even reading my

letters?

What I realized, in hindsight, was that every month our top
customers were being reminded that we existed. Every time one of
those customers saw a letter and threw it away, even without
opening it, our logo was flashing across their eyes.

Content is important, but the point is, there is great power in
simply reminding your customers you exist. I was young and dumb


at the time, but I'd stumbled onto something. Your customers may
not need your product today, and they might not need it tomorrow,
but on the day they do need it, you want to make sure they
remember who you are, what you offer, and where they can reach
you if they want to buy it.

Send Potential Customers Regular, Valuable Emails

The days of direct mail aren't completely dead, but it goes
without saying that email and text messages have largely taken over.
And for good reason. My company would not be where it is without
having built a large email list. Because we have collected emails, we
are able to earn trust by offering free value, invite customers to
helpful webinars and live streams, give away massive amounts of
content, offer the free use of our software tools, and, of course, let
customers know when I release a new book or product.

Now that you've obtained email addresses through your lead
generator, the next step is to create an automated email campaign
that provides value and earns trust.

Also, an automated email campaign is a terrific way to remind
customers you exist. And if they happen to open your email (you'll
be surprised at how many people actually do), then it's a great way
to invite them into a story in which the value you provide can
change their lives.

What is an automated email campaign? An automated email
campaign is a prewritten sequence of emails that begin to go out
once a person is added to your list. Some people call this an "autoresponder series," but the idea is to invite customers into a narrative
that enlightens them and builds a relationship.

The same trust-building experience can be created via text too.
With text, you want to keep things short and likely provide links to
helpful tools, or you can limit it to sales announcements or special
offers. Text, by the way, is also an incredibly effective way to keep
your brand in people's minds, long before and long after they place
an order. In fact, I get routine text messages from a brand called
Hank's Belts. Hank sells, you guessed it, belts. I've never been much


of a belt guy, but when I bought a belt from Hank's Belts as a
Christmas present for my father-in-law, the business texted me
almost every day for months. Surprisingly, the text messages never
bothered me. They were usually special offers or announcements of
a new belt or line of belts, and, well, I was kind of interested. Later,
when I actually needed a new, black, dress belt, I immediately
thought of Hank's Belts and visited their site and placed an order.
Not only this, but I've told friends about Hank's Belts. You might
think I have told friends about Hank's Belts because they make good
belts, but the truth is, that's not the reason at all. Lots of companies
make good belts. I told my friends about Hank's Belts because
they've moved into the mental real estate of my mind by sending
frequent text messages! In other words, they made me remember
them by staying in touch and reminding me they exist. This, in short,
speaks to the power of email and text-message marketing.

DOES ANYBODY READ THESE THINGS?

Don't worry if the open rates on your emails are low. A 20 percent
open rate is the industry standard, so anything above that is
performing well. And remember, even if a person sees and deletes an
email, the goal has been accomplished: you are "branding" yourself
into their universe.

If someone unsubscribes from your list, that's a good thing. That
person probably never would have bought from you anyway; besides,
the subtraction of an email reduces the size of your list, so you aren't
paying your email service provider for emails that customer doesn't
want. The last thing you want to do in your marketing is bother
someone, so if a person unsubscribes, all the better. It's more
important to have a list of qualified, interested subscribers than a large
number of people who never intend to place an order.

I'm subscribed to plenty of mailing lists and hardly ever open emails
from them. Why don't I unsubscribe? Because every twenty or so
emails, they send something I actually want to open. But even the
emails I don't open are effectively branding the name of those
companies into my conscious mind and thus my mental list of options
when it finally occurs to me that I need the sort of products they sell.


Getting Started with Email and Text Marketing

I will talk about text-message marketing in a bit. First, though,
let's talk about email marketing campaigns and how they can help
you grow your business. While there are many kinds of automated
email campaigns, the one we recommend starting with is the nurture
campaign. A nurture campaign is a simple email that offers your
subscribers valuable information as it relates to your products or
services.

Not unlike your lead generator, you want these emails to
continue positioning you as the guide and to create trust and
reciprocity with potential customers. There will come a time to ask
for a sale, but this isn't the primary goal of a nurture campaign. A
typical nurture campaign may have an email going out once each
week, and the order might look like this:

Email #1: Nurture email
Email #2: Nurture email
Email #3: Nurture email
Email #4: Sales email with a call to action

The pattern of sending three nurture emails followed by a sales
email can be repeated month after month for as long as you want to
send them. Some brands never stop, just sending out an indefinite
number of emails for as long as the customer stays subscribed to
the list. I think this is smart marketing, honestly, because you never
know when your customer is going to have the problem your
product solves. And when they do, you want them to remember you.
That said, I recommend creating a few months' worth of material to
get started and then adding to that campaign as you have time to
create more. The idea behind a nurture campaign is to offer
something of great value and then occasionally ask for an order. If
your lead generator does its job of acquiring new contacts, in a short
time you will have hundreds of potential customers being introduced
to and reminded of your business week after week. And when those


customers need help in your area of expertise, they will remember
you and place an order.

So what's the difference between a nurture email and a sales

email with an offer and call to action?

What Is a Nurture Email?

A good way to craft each nurture email is to use an effective
formula that offers simple, helpful advice to a customer. I've been
using this formula for years because it helps me offer clear value.

Paragraph #1: Talk about a problem.
Paragraph #2: Offer a plan, idea, recipe, or formula that solves

the problem.

Paragraph #3: Describe what life can look like if the problem is

solved.

Paragraph #4: If possible, turn the advice into a three-step plan

and use those steps to summarize your advice.

I also recommend including a postscript, aka the PS. Often, the
PS is the only part of the text somebody who opens a mass email
will actually read.

That's really it. If you cover these four areas as efficiently as
possible, you'll be crafting emails your customers open, read, and
remember. And don't forget, StoryBrand.AI can actually write a
rough draft of these emails for you.

WHAT ARE THE ELEMENTS OF A GOOD NURTURE EMAIL?
Here's how a nurture email campaign works: Recently we consulted
with the owner of a dog boarding company interested in growing her
business. We recommended she create a lead-generating PDF called
"5 Things Your Dog Thinks About When You're Away" in exchange
for the email addresses of qualified customers. What dog lover
wouldn't want to read a PDF with a title like that? Perfect.


A few days after somebody downloaded the PDF, they would get

the first email in the nurture campaign. That email looked like this:

Subject: Should We Free Feed Our Dogs?

Dear ______,

At Crest Hill Boarding we're often asked whether it's okay to free feed our
dogs. Free feeding a dog is certainly the easiest way to make sure a dog
always has food and never goes hungry, but there are some problems you
should know about when it comes to free feeding. Dogs that are free fed
often gain excess fat later in life and other health problems can occur
without our noticing.

We recommend feeding your dog a set amount, once or twice per day. After
twenty minutes, if your pet hasn't eaten their food, we recommend
discarding the excess and waiting until the next set time to feed them again.

By sticking to a set amount of food and a set feeding schedule, you'll be able
to monitor what your dog eats and also be able to diagnose any illness your
pet may be suffering from that is making them lose their appetite. This will
ensure your dog stays healthy and happy long into their life.

Here's to enjoying our pets for a long, long time.

Sincerely,
X

PS. As for how much each dog should be fed, it really depends on how old
your dog is and how big. Next time you and your dog are in the shop,
introduce us to your dog and we'll tell you everything we know about the
breed.

The bottom of this email contained our client's logo, their oneliner, and a phone number in case anyone was ready to place an
order. Still, getting an order wasn't the primary concern. The primary
concern was to offer something of value, position the business as
the guide, create reciprocity, and, most importantly, stay familiar to
the customer.


You can see how getting a weekly email like this would make our
client's kennel stand out in any dog owner's mind. The next time a
potential customer had to suddenly leave town, they'd fondly
remember her kennel and take their dog in for boarding.

After three more emails like this, our client included an email that

contained an offer and a call to action.

How to Write the Offer and Call-to-Action Email

About every third or fourth email in a nurture campaign should
offer a product or service the customer can buy. The key here is to
be direct. Making a passive offer is only going to make you look
weak, so know going into it that your sales email is just that--an
email that sells something.

THE SALES FORMULA WE PREFER LOOKS LIKE THIS:

Paragraph #1: Talk about the customer's problem.
Paragraph #2: Describe a product you offer that solves this

problem.

Paragraph #3: Describe what life can look like for the reader

once the problem is solved.

Paragraph #4: Ensure that purchasing your product is the right
decision if they want to solve their problem, let them know
how much it costs, mention any special discounts or bonuses,
and then ask the customer to place an order.

A GOOD OFFER AND CALL-TO-ACTION EMAIL
Similar to the nurture email, the offer and call-to-action email aims
to solve a problem. The only difference is that the solution to the
problem is your product and a strong call to action has been
inserted. You are inviting this customer to do business with you.
Here's an offer and call-to-action email we wrote for Crest Hill dog
kennel:


Subject: A solution for scary boarding

Dear ______,

If you're anything like us, you hate leaving your dog behind when you go out
of town. And you hate the idea of your dog being locked in a crate next to a
bunch of other stress-inducing, barking dogs. As dog lovers, we used to hate
that feeling too, and that's why we created Crest Hill Boarding.

At Crest Hill, your dog plays so hard all day, they are eager to lie down at
night. We have three full-time staff members throwing tennis balls and
enticing dogs to run and play so they're far too distracted to realize they're
anywhere other than in paradise. This means that by the end of the day all
the other dogs are eager to sleep too, and so your dog rests comfortably in a
mostly quiet environment. You won't believe how quiet our kennels are once
we put the dogs to bed at 8 p.m.

Right now you can book three nights at Crest Hill at half price. This is a
onetime offer, and it's meant to introduce you to how differently we take care
of your pet. We think once you see how eager your dog will be to join us,
you'll feel better when you have to leave town. No more guilt. No more sad
goodbyes.

To take advantage of this offer, just call us. You don't even have to know
when the next time you're going to leave town. We will just mark you in our
system as having taken advantage of the offer.

Call us today at 555-5555.

We can't wait for your dog to experience the Crest Hill difference.

Sincerely,
X

PS: Make sure to call today. The call will only take a couple of minutes, and
you'll be in our system forever. After you call, your dog's favorite home away
from home will be waiting whenever you're in need of a safe, reliable, and
fun-for-your-dog solution.

This email weaves in a tremendous amount of content from Crest
Hill's StoryBrand BrandScript, including the external problem and
internal problem along with sound bites from the success element.


The gist of the email is that if a subscriber purchases Crest Hill's
offer, one of their concerns will be resolved.

Note that the call to action is strong and contains a degree of
scarcity: it is a onetime offer. Anyone who reads this email knows
exactly what we want them to do: call and secure a discount so they
can later board their dog at Crest Hill.

What Software Should We Use?

There are many software options when it comes to creating an
automated email campaign. If you're working with a designer or
advertising agency, this is likely a question for them. You want your
designer to work with whatever software they're accustomed to
using. We are big fans of Keap because the CRM is designed for
businesses that have between one and twenty-five thousand email
subscribers, which covers the needs of the majority of small- to
medium-size businesses. Keap also consulted with us to help build
our artificial intelligence tools, and they know what they're talking
about.

Start Small

Getting an email campaign up and running can feel intimidating,
but the process of creating and using a CRM doesn't have to be a
fearful experience. Start small. To get started, simply open a Word
document and start crafting your emails or, better, use StoryBrand.AI
to craft rough draft emails and then edit them to your liking. You can
paste these drafts into an email or CRM later. Writing that initial
email is the first step. Once you read it back to yourself, you're going
to want to send it to customers. That's the beginning. When you
start automating that email, you're going to start getting results,
which is going to make you want to write more of them. Before you
know it, you'll have a robust campaign of emails that will engage
customers at all hours of the day, even while you sleep.


STEP SIX: COLLECT AND TELL STORIES OF
TRANSFORMATION

As we learned earlier in the book, few things are more foundational
to a compelling story than a hero's transformation. Why? Because
transformation is a core desire for every human being. That's why so
many stories are about the hero transforming into a better version of
themselves and specifically into a person who is competent to defeat
the villain and solve their problem.

People love movies about characters who transform, and they
love businesses that help them experience transformation too. One
of the best ways we can demonstrate how we help our customers
transform is through testimonials.

Great testimonials give future customers the gift of going second.
The challenge lies in getting the right kind of testimonial: one that
showcases your value (the results you get for customers) and the
experience people had working with you. Simply asking for a
testimonial usually won't work because customers will share their
feelings about you by default. "Nancy is a great friend! We highly
recommend Nancy and her team!"

While those are nice words, they do very little in telling their
story of transformation. In a testimonial like that, there are no
specific results mentioned or details about what life is like now that
the transformation has taken place.

If you're asking customers to write a testimonial for you, it's likely
they are (1) too busy to give deep thought to writing the testimonial
or (2) subpar writers or communicators.

Weaving together a compelling tale of transformation means you
have to ask the right questions--you need some raw materials to
work with. The following questions will allow you to build a bank of
compelling testimonials that work with nearly any customer quickly
and easily.

These questions work because they "lead" the client down a
specific train of thought. Simply use these questions to create a form
customers can fill out. Once they complete the form, the natural flow


of the sentences will allow you to copy and paste the answers to
build a client case study.

These same questions can also be used to create video
testimonials. Simply invite customers to be interviewed and ask
them the following questions. Once the video is edited and B-roll is
inserted, you can feature your video on your website or in a sales or
nurture email campaign or on a landing page.

Here are five questions most likely to generate the best response

for a customer testimonial:

1. What was the problem you were having before you

discovered our product?

2. What did the frustration feel like as you tried to solve that

problem?

3. What was different about our product?
4. Take us to the moment when you realized our product was

actually working to solve your problem.

5. Tell us what life looks like now that your problem is solved

or being solved.

You can see the arc of the questions naturally yields a
transformation story. Once you capture the testimonial, feature it
live
everywhere: emails, promo videos, keynote speeches,
interviews, or at events. One season we closed each episode of the
Building a StoryBrand podcast with an interview with someone who
transformed their business and their life by applying the StoryBrand
framework. The response was overwhelming. We noted an
immediate uptick in book purchases and interest in becoming a
StoryBrand Certified Guide.

The point is that people are drawn to transformation. When they
see transformation in others, they want it for themselves. The more
we
journey our customers have
experienced, the faster our business will grow.

transformation

feature

the


STEP SEVEN: CREATE A SYSTEM THAT GENERATES
REFERRALS

If you ask any business owner how they get new customers, the
majority will say "word of mouth." It would seem obvious, then, that
every business out there has a system for generating more word-ofmouth referrals. Unfortunately, that's seldom the case.

Once you create a system that funnels potential customers into
becoming actual customers, the final step is to turn around and
invite happy customers to become evangelists for your brand. This
will happen only if you create a system that invites and incentivizes
people to spread the word. Various studies conducted by the
American Marketing Association have shown that referrals and peer
recommendations are up to 2.5 times more responsive than any
other marketing channel. A marketing effort with a 250 percent
increase in efficacy means we're talking about something to take
seriously.

If you've done the simple, fun work of creating your StoryBrand
BrandScript, your message should be clear. When you create a
process that encourages referrals, you get more and more people
repeating that message to their friends and family.

Let's take a step-by-step look at what it takes to create an

effective referral system.

Identify Your Existing, Ideal Customers

At the top of the current Domino's Pizza website there's a link
that says, "Don't have a pizza profile? Create one." That link, even
though it's in small print, is likely a huge moneymaker. Those who
frequently order from the restaurant chain use this link to build their
perfect pizza and then enter their credit card information to order it.
Domino's then sends them occasional prompts to reorder, especially
before big events like football games or holiday weekends when they
know their customers are more likely to enjoy their product.


Now imagine taking that strategy to the next level. What if
creating a special database of existing, passionate customers and
communicating with them differently could help you generate
referrals? Developing a simple campaign using tools your existing
fans can use to spread word about your brand is possible. Not only
could you increase your existing business but many of these happy
customers will become an activated salesforce and invite others.
How do you do it? Simple: Email or text your list offering a bonus if
people tell their friends. For example, you might offer "one month
free" or "a special discount code" that could be used when folks
email the specific link you've offered to a friend or family member.

The key here is to make the technology easy to use. Give them
their own link. Or, if your product is a high-ticket item, you might
even skin a landing page for your customer to use. The easiest way,
though, is to offer a "friends and family" discount in the form of a
specific coupon code they can pass along to others.

Give Your Customers a Helpful Tool They Can Use to Spread
the Word

A few years ago, I utilized the services of a consulting firm that,
as part of their system, asked me for a list of referrals. The request
made me immediately uncomfortable. I felt like they wanted to use
me for my friends, or worse, turn me into one of their salespeople.

That said, the service they provided was good, and had they
framed the request another way, I might have complied. Specifically,
it would have been nice if they'd have created a small, educational
video that would have been valuable to my friends. I'd much more
quickly pass along a video than I would hand over my friends' email
addresses.

Consider creating a PDF or video that you automatically send to
new and happy clients along with an email that goes something like
this:

Dear Friend,


Thanks for doing business with us. A number of our clients have wanted to
tell their friends about how we help customers, but they aren't sure how to
do so. We've put together a little video that will help your friends solve X
problem. If you have any friends with X problem, feel free to send it along.
We'd be happy to follow up with any of them, and we'll be sure to let you
know whether we were able to help them, giving you all the credit!

We know you value your relationships and so do we. If your friends are
experiencing a problem we've helped you solve, we'd love to help them too.
If there's anything else we can do, please let us know.

Sincerely,
Nancy

PS. X problem can be frustrating. If you'd rather introduce us to your friend
in person, just let us know. We are more than happy to meet with them in
their place of business or at our office.

Offer a Reward

If you really want to prime the pump, offer a reward to existing
clients who refer their friends. As I mentioned earlier, my wife has
invited dozens of friends to try out Blue Apron, a company that
sends ready-to-cook meals right to people's doors. Plenty of Betsy's
friends have enjoyed the service and signed on for themselves.
Betsy receives a reward from Blue Apron every time somebody signs
up.

Another way to offer a reward is to start an affiliate program. You
can offer your customers a 10 percent commission on the orders
they bring to you. This system has generated millions of dollars for
thousands of companies. A good affiliate program can do the work
of an expensive salesforce if you structure the percentages well.

AUTOMATE THE WORK
The easiest, fastest referral system can be automated using Keap or
any other CRM. Simply include any customer who places one or two
orders in an automated campaign that offers them an educational


video or PDF they can pass on, an added reward for telling their
friends about you, or even a commission.

Some Real-World Referral Systems

Implementing a referral system takes work, but it's effective.

Take some inspiration from these samples:

A 100 Percent Refund for Three New Referrals Within a
Semester. This was the brainchild of an after-school testprep academy that prepared high school students for the SAT
and ACT college admissions test, but it could just as well have
been an eye doctor or a massage therapist. Parents were
given a referral card to hand out to friends, many of whom
had kids around the same age. Each time one of the cards
came back, the referrer was credited hundreds of dollars
because these courses were expensive! When they referred
three new registrants, the referrer was given a 100 percent
refund. Sure, the kids were competing with test scores, but
the parents ended up competing for referrals, and business
skyrocketed. The business also offered special seminars for
parents and students of the 100 Percent Referral Club.

Invite-a-Friend Coupons. When students signed up for golf
lessons, the range offered each new student several coupons
for a free bucket of golf balls for a friend. While it's an
individual game, golf is a social sport since people enjoy
playing together. The course experienced a 40 percent
increase in students signing up for lessons because word of
mouth spread so effectively.

Open-House Party. Whenever a home contractor finished a

large-scale decking or remodel project, he asked the
homeowners if they would be willing to throw an open-house
party in exchange for a slight discount. Friends, family, and
neighbors were invited to a cookout on the newly built deck.
The contractor used this opportunity to explain how the work
was done and pass out cards. With only a few open-house


parties, the contractor filled his schedule for the following
twelve months.

Free Follow-Up Photos. A wedding photographer in Syracuse,
New York, offered couples a free follow-up portrait on their
one-year anniversary if the couple provided three referrals at
the time of the wedding. She also followed up with cards to
the entire bridal party, expressing how much of a pleasure it
was to photograph them. Needless to say, business boomed
because people who are in wedding parties often end up
getting married soon themselves, especially if they catch the
bouquet!

WHAT'S YOUR MARKETING PLAN?

In my twenties I spent an entire year playing chess. Nearly every
day I met a friend at a coffee shop and we'd go at it for a couple of
hours. My skills improved, and I ended up winning more than half
my matches until another friend started showing up. He beat me
every time, usually within twenty moves.

The reason? I knew a lot about the philosophy of chess, but I
didn't have what's referred to as an opening. Before sitting down to
play, my more skilled opponent already knew his first five moves.
This opening strategy was critical to his success. Once I memorized
a few openings of my own, I started to win again.

If the StoryBrand BrandScript is a foundation, the seven
marketing pieces (or strategies) that make up the StoryBrand
Messaging and Marketing Campaign should serve as your opening
moves. These seven simple yet powerful tools have been used by
countless businesses to increase their revenue.

Consider the messaging and marketing campaign a checklist.
After you've created your StoryBrand BrandScript, get to work on
each aspect of this playbook and watch as your customers engage
and your company grows. If you want help creating your StoryBrand


Messaging and Marketing Campaign or if you want a marketing
coach to help you create several of them, perhaps one for each
division or product you sell, you can find a directory of the marketing
coaches I have personally certified at MarketingMadeSimple.com.

If you're serious about creating a StoryBrand Messaging and
Marketing Campaign, spend an hour at StoryBrand.AI and have the
StoryBrand Brain create your campaign. When you do, you will get a
robust report including a tagline, one-liner, wireframed website, lead
generator, follow-up emails, sales script, narrative scripts for
YouTube videos and social media, podcast prompts and topics,
bonus ideas to create urgency, upsell product ideas, plug-and-play
social media posts plus industry trends specific to your industry.


AFTERWORD

I've lost count of how many StoryBrand clients we've helped in the
last decade, but it's certainly tens of thousands. My hope is that this
book has been the best marketing investment you've ever made
because it's helped you improve your existing marketing so much
and also because it has inspired you to create even more marketing
and messaging that works.

You probably have a much more interesting product or service
than you realize. You've likely just not found your audience yet. Do
not be disheartened. When you clarify your message, your audience
will find you.

If you really want to internalize the framework or introduce the
framework to friends and coworkers, listen to and share StoryBrand
Radio Theater Presents: Pete and Joe Save Their Mother's Company
on Audible or Youtube.com/@storybrand. We had a lot of fun
recording that story, and I even get to play a bit role as the ghost of
myself. You will have to listen to find out what I'm talking about. By
the way, that's called a cliff-hanger, and you should incorporate a
few of those into your marketing too!


STORYBRAND.AI

create

At StoryBrand.AI, you can use the
StoryBrand Brain
to create a
BrandScript to clarify your message
for free. The StoryBrand Brain can
a
StoryBrand
also
Messaging
Marketing
and
Campaign that includes: a tagline,
one-liner, wireframed website, lead
generator, follow-up emails, sales
script, narrative scripts for YouTube
videos and social media, podcast
prompts and topics, bonus ideas to
create urgency, upsell product
ideas, plug-and-play social media
posts plus industry trends specific
to your industry. Our messaging
and marketing campaign is perfect
owners,
for
company,
anybody

business
running a

small


representatives.

marketing and sales directors, and
The
account
campaign generator will also work
to brainstorm a new product or
brand.

Get access at StoryBrand.AI


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I'm grateful to Kyle Reid, Tyler Ginn, Chad Cannon, Emily Pastina,
Tim Schurrer, Koula Callahan, Kyle Reed, Avery Csorba, J. J.
Peterson, Chad Snavely, Suzanne Norman, Matt Harris, Aaron Alfrey,
Lucas Alley, Tyler Bridges, Sam Buchholz, Zach Grusznski, Dagne
Saito, Andy Harrison, Hannah Hitchcox, Marlee Joseph, Kelley Kirker,
Kari Loncar, Ben Landheer, Josh Landrum, Paige McQueen, Amanda
Mitchell, James Mitchell, Carey Murdock, Luke Pastina, Etsy Pitman,
Bobby Richards, Macy Robison, Prentice Sims, Hilary Smith, James
Sweeting, Jordan Tatro, Taylor Wellman, and Betsy Miller for helping
me build StoryBrand. Their tireless work on behalf of our clients has
helped thousands of businesses connect with customers, hire more
people, and solve their customers' problems. This team is more than
a staff; they are family.

I'm also grateful to Mike Kim, who helped me edit the first edition
of this book. Webster Younce, Heather Skelton, and Brigitta Nortker
of HarperCollins also contributed significantly to the book with their
careful edits and additions.

Special thanks to Brandon Dickerson for his help fleshing out

commercial evidence for the framework.

Lastly, thank you. Thank you for daring to make and sell things,
for solving customers' problems, helping heroes find homes, and
putting your customers' stories above your own. As I said in the
beginning, may you be richly rewarded for putting your customer
first and inviting them into a story that solves their problem and
helps them win.


ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Donald Miller is the CEO of Coach Builder and StoryBrand.AI. He is
the author of several books including Building a StoryBrand, Hero on
a Mission, and How to Grow Your Small Business. His latest book is
Coach Builder: How to Turn Your Expertise into a Profitable Coaching
Career. Donald lives in Nashville, Tennessee with his wife, Elizabeth
and their daughter, Emmeline.


PRAISE FOR THE STORYBRAND
FRAMEWORK

"Before StoryBrand, customers weren't seeing themselves in our offering. We're a
staffing agency that specializes in helping companies find and hire the right
people. We help companies post job applications, we test candidates, and we
provide software for applicant tracking. Sadly, our message, though, was all about
us. We were talking about our strengths rather than the customer's needs. Also,
our marketing material was too complex and hard to understand. After bringing in
a StoryBrand facilitator, we clarified our message and made it about our customer.
We revised our sales process and started listening to our customers' needs, asking
them about their external problems and how those problems were making them
feel in their daily work. The results were immediate. We created our BrandScript in
December and spent the next couple of months executing our new messaging
across every part of the customer journey. Within seven months we'd seen a 118
percent increase in overall revenue. Yes, that means we more than doubled sales.
We also saw a 276 percent increase in the number of paying customers during
that same time period. And we're still growing. In the last six months, we've been
increasing revenue 9 percent month over month, which really adds up!"

--EDWIN JANSEN, HEAD OF MARKETING, FITZII

"Lipscomb University is one of the fastest-growing universities in the Southeast, so
it was no small task to get all the stories of our school clear and on mission. We
knew it was important, and so we brought in StoryBrand to deliver a workshop to
our entire faculty. Without question, it helped us understand who we were, who
we were serving, and what we needed to communicate to offer value. After
StoryBrand, each department felt like they were a subplot in the greater story of
Lipscomb. The most tangible way we saw results was through our outreach to the
community. We stopped positioning ourselves as the hero and instead began to
serve the greater collective vision of Nashville. All of this culminated in a series
called Imagine, in which we brought in the mayor of Nashville, Governor Bill
Haslam, and former president George W. Bush to speak about how Nashville and
Lipscomb could positively contribute to the world. We stopped talking about us


and we started serving as a guide to the community around us. Since this
dramatic pivot, the renewed energy around a greater vision in which Lipscomb
would play a part has resulted in more than $50 million in donations that will go
toward development. I'd say the results have been fantastic."

--JOHN LOWRY, VICE PRESIDENT OF DEVELOPMENT, LIPSCOMB
UNIVERSITY

"I was asked to give a TED Talk about the work I do advocating for proton therapy
as a treatment for cancer. As I reviewed the enormous binder of material I wanted
to cover, I realized the task was epic. There was no way I could boil down all I
wanted to say into an eighteen-minute talk. After spending a single day with a
StoryBrand facilitator, I had hope. We mapped out my talk on a whiteboard, and I
agreed to leave most of the things I wanted to talk about on the editing room
floor. The talk was easy to memorize, flowed like a short story, and engaged the
audience from beginning to end. StoryBrand didn't just help me prepare my TED
Talk, they helped me understand how to better approach the advocacy I'd been
doing. It all comes down to simple, repeatable messages that grab the audience.
Without StoryBrand, I'd have never been able to clarify my message and inform
the audience about a cause I care so deeply about. With the help of StoryBrand, I
hit a home run, or more appropriately, I landed a triple luxe."

--SCOTT HAMILTON, OLYMPIC GOLD MEDALIST, FOUNDER OF SCOTT
CARES, AND THREE-TIME CANCER SURVIVOR

"These Numbers Have Faces is a nonprofit working to provide educational equality
in sub-Saharan Africa, where only five percent of the population will attend
university. Before StoryBrand, our biggest problem was we were playing the hero.
We talked more about our nonprofit than we did about our students or our donors.
When we did talk about our students' problems, we talked about their external
problems rather than their internal problems, which we now know is a limited way
of approaching our messaging. After attending the StoryBrand workshop, we
overhauled our messaging. In our emails, we began to connect donors with the
narrative of the mission, and on social media, we told the stories of our heroic
students. We used our StoryBrand BrandScript to draft our end-of-year report that
got significant attention. As of today, we are on track to raise more money this
year than ever before. We blew our fundraising goal out of the water. We will go
into next year with the largest cash advantage we've ever had. Team, donor, and
student morale is at an all-time high."

--JUSTIN ZORADI, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THESE NUMBERS HAVE FACES

"When EntreLeadership grew from a brand that basically just offered live events
into a full-fledged coaching service for small business owners, we started
experiencing challenges in how to explain what we did and how we did it. Even
though we'd been writing copy and updating our website for years, the reality was


that most of the time we were just guessing at the best way to say things. As a
result, people didn't understand our coaching service the way we thought they
did. This was frustrating because the value of our program was so obvious to us.
The mistake we made was assuming it was obvious to our customers too. We
were clear . . . they were confused. That doesn't sell. I knew we were capable of
more conversions and more effective connection with our audience, but I wasn't
sure how to get there. It wasn't until we brought in a StoryBrand facilitator and
sat down as a team to overhaul our entire world through the lens of the
StoryBrand framework that we became crystal clear on how to explain our
coaching service. EntreLeadership has grown significantly, and we are tracking to
more than double membership in the next two years. The StoryBrand framework
is an invaluable resource, and I now expect our marketers to use it in everything
we create."

--DANIEL TARDY, VICE PRESIDENT OF ENTRELEADERSHIP, RAMSEY
SOLUTIONS

"At Marie Mae we sell beautiful paper products and office supplies. Before
StoryBrand, our marketing efforts were a jumbled mess. I once overheard a close
friend talking about Marie Mae Company . . . and it was nothing close to what we
were doing. I attended a StoryBrand Marketing Workshop and learned we were
talking about the wrong things in our marketing copy. This was life changing for
our start-up. We used the framework to simplify our message down to a single
tagline. We started focusing more on the meaningful work our customers were
doing and showing how they could make an even bigger impact around the world
just by choosing office products that also make an impact. We simplified our
website using the SB7 framework, and all of our marketing emails are now run
through the SB7 filter as well. In the year since we implemented the StoryBrand
framework, we have increased our revenue by 20x and gotten our products into
the hands of 250,000 people. We attribute this success largely to the clarity in our
story and the shift in our marketing messages. We are grateful."

--JILLIAN RYAN, FOUNDER OF MARIE MAE COMPANY

"Before StoryBrand, I felt like my marketing was falling flat. I felt like my business
had hit a ceiling. Going through the framework taught me I was talking about my
programs all wrong. I used the StoryBrand framework to recreate my sales
material from scratch. It took quite a bit of effort to rethink the whole thing. I
dipped my toes in the water by making a few changes to key pieces of marketing
material, being sure they spoke directly to my clients' needs. I relaunched my
program with my new sales materials and saw a massive response. A campaign
that would have typically brought in $6,000 to $9,000 brought in more than
$40,000. StoryBrand is the most practical, applicable, implementable, logical,
simple, useful marketing program I've ever experienced. It's going to change
everything in my business, and I'm just getting started."


--JENNY SHIH, BUSINESS COACH

"We often got a great deal of confusion when we tried to answer the question, 'So
what do you do?' We were regularly frustrated by the fact that we had a huge
body of organizational knowledge about our own work, and it required at least an
hour to convey it to people. As a start-up, nonprofit organization, our revenue
(donations) were barely enough to keep us afloat. We knew a big reason for this
was that our model was a bit complex and it didn't get communicated with clarity,
leaving potential donors confused. We took a big risk and chose to send our entire
US team (three people) to StoryBrand--a risk that ate up a significant cut of our
cash on hand. StoryBrand was indispensable for us. In the days following
StoryBrand, we made a hard pivot on our communications strategy. Over the
course of a couple of months, we went from an organization on the verge of
collapse to an organization that was thriving. In Q4 alone (post-StoryBrand), we
literally tripled our annual revenue. Now Mavuno has expanded its reach by 400
percent in eastern Congo, and we are ending extreme poverty for thousands of
Congolese. We are making dramatic change for some of the most vulnerable
people in one of the world's most war-torn environments. We are postured for
enormous scale, and that is due in large part to StoryBrand. Thank you for helping
us change the world."

--DANIEL MYATT, CEO OF MAVUNO


STORYBRAND
RESOURCES


WANT TO HELP OTHER BUSINESSES
WITH THEIR MESSAGING AND
MARKETING STRATEGY?

BECOME A STORYBRAND CERTIFIED COACH

It's like being part of the best marketing agency in the world--
except you maintain 100% control and ownership of your business.
Whether you're a copywriter, social media marketer, graphic
designer, web designer, web developer, marketing consultant, or
agency owner, the StoryBrand coach program will give you proven
frameworks to help you deliver exceptional results for clients and
grow your business. Apply to become a StoryBrand certified coach
now at StoryBrand.com/Coach.

WANT TO LEARN VIA AN ONLINE COURSE?

Get the StoryBrand Course on Business Made Simple

Want to dive deeper into the StoryBrand framework and go
through a course to create your BrandScript? The StoryBrand Online
Course will help you create your BrandScript while providing
numerous examples and expert tips along the way. Once you're
done with the course, you will have a compelling message you can
use to create websites, keynotes, elevator pitches, and much more.


Get access to the StoryBrand Online Course in the Business Made
Simple Platform at BusinessMadeSimple.com/StoryBrand.

WANT YOUR TEAM TO UNDERSTAND AND
IMPLEMENT THE STORYBRAND FRAMEWORK?

Book a StoryBrand Private Workshop

If you want to align your team, grow your business, and optimize
your marketing strategy, the StoryBrand Private Workshop will help
you do that. You'll spend 1.5 days with one of our expert facilitators
who will help you clarify your message, unify your team, and
develop a marketing strategy that works. Our facilitators will even
take a look at your existing marketing materials once your
BrandScript
at
Book
StoryBrand.com/PrivateWorkshops.

a workshop

created.

now

is

WANT YOUR SALES TEAM TO CLOSE MORE SALES?

Book a StoryBrand Sales Transformation Training

If you want your sales team to learn how to use the power of
to close more sales, book a StoryBrand Sales
storytelling
Transformation Training. Your sales team will learn how to invite
customers into a story and position your products as the solution
your customers have been looking for. Your sales team will walk
away with 7 key talking points to use in every sales conversation so
they can close more deals and drive revenue for your business. Book
a
at
StoryBrand
StoryBrandSales.com.

Transformation

Training

Sales

now


CREATE A STORYBRAND
MESSAGING AND MARKETING
CAMPAIGN

GET YOUR CUSTOM TAGLINE,
WIREFRAMED WEBSITE, AND MORE

When you go to StoryBrand.AI, you can use our artificial
intelligence tool to generate your BrandScript, tagline, one-liner,
wireframed website, lead generator, follow-up emails, sales
script, narrative scripts for YouTube videos and social media,
podcast prompts and topics, bonus ideas to create urgency,
upsell product ideas, plug-and-play social media posts plus
industry trends specific to your industry. The StoryBrand
Messaging and Marketing report is your secret weapon to grow
your business.


NEED HELP EXECUTING YOUR
STORYBRAND
MARKETING AND MESSAGING
CAMPAIGN?

Let's be honest. Nothing will
change unless you execute.

Find a coach to help you through the
process at MarketingMadeSimple.com.

StoryBrand does not take a percentage of sales from any of our certified
coaches.


NOTES

Chapter 2: The Secret Weapon That Will Grow Your Business

1. Samantha Sharf, "The World's Largest Tech Companies 2016: Apple Bests

Samsung, Microsoft and Alphabet," Forbes, May 26, 2016,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/samanthasharf/2016/05/26/the-worlds-largesttech-companies-2016-apple-bests-samsung-microsoft-andalphabet/#2b0c584d89ee.

2. "Alfred Hitchcock: Quotes," IMDB, accessed July 29, 2024,

http://m.imdb.com/name/nm0000033/quotes.

Chapter 3: The Simple SB7 Framework

1. "Great Presentations: Understand the Audience's Power," Duarte,

http://www.duarte.com/great-presentations-understand-the-audiencespower/.

2. Ronald Reagan, "Farewell Address to the Nation," January 11, 1989, The

American Presidency Project, http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?
pid=29650.

3. "President Bill Clinton--Acceptance Speech," PBS Newshour, August 29, 1996,

http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/politics-july-dec96-clinton_08-29/.

4. Claire Suddath, "A Brief History of Campaign Songs: Franklin D. Roosevelt,"

Time, accessed July 29, 2024,
http://content.time.com/time/specials/packages/article/0,28804,1840981_184
0998_1840901,00.html.

Chapter 4: A Character

1. Viktor E. Frankl, Man's Search for Meaning (Boston: Beacon Press, 2006).

Chapter 5: Has a Problem

1. James Scott Bell, Plot & Structure: Techniques and Exercises for Crafting a
Plot That Grips Readers from Start to Finish (Cincinnati, OH: Writer's Digest


Books, 2004), 12.

2. "Why CarMax?," CarMax.com, accessed February 10, 2017,
https://www.carmax.com/car-buying-process/why-carmax.

3. "The Just 100: America's Best Corporate Citizens," Forbes, May 2016,

http://www.forbes.com/companies/carmax/.

Chapter 6: And Meets a Guide

1. Bell, Plot & Structure, 31-32.
2. Christopher Booker, The Seven Basic Plots: Why We Tell Stories (London:

Continuum, 2004), 194.

3. Ben Sisario, "Jay Z Reveals Plans for Tidal, a Streaming Music Service," New

York Times, March 30, 2015,
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/31/business/media/jay-z-reveals-plans-fortidal-a-streaming-music-service.html.
4. Sisario, "Jay Z Reveals Plans for Tidal."
5. "Clinton vs. Bush in 1992 Debate," YouTube video, 4:08, posted by "Seth

Masket," March 19, 2007, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ffbFvKlWqE.

6. Infusionsoft home page, accessed February 9, 2017,

https://www.infusionsoft.com.

7. Amy Cuddy, Presence: Bringing Your Boldest Self to Your Biggest Challenges

(New York: Little, Brown, 2015), 71-72.

Chapter 7: Who Gives Them a Plan

1. "Why CarMax?," CarMax.com, accessed February 10, 2017,
https://www.carmax.com/car-buying-process/why-carmax.

2. Arlena Sawyers, "Hot Topics, Trends to Watch in 2016," Automotive News,

December 28, 2015,
http://www.autonews.com/article/20151228/RETAIL04/312289987/hot-topicstrends-to-watch-in-2016.

Chapter 9: That Helps Them Avoid Failure

1. Susanna Kim, "Allstate's 'Mayhem' Is Biggest Winner of College Bowl," ABC

News, January 2, 2015, http://abcnews.go.com/Business/allstates-mayhembiggest-winner-college-bowl/story?id=27960362.

2. Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of
Decision Under Risk," Econometrica 47, no. 2 (March 1979): 263-91,
https://www.jstor.org/stable/1914185.

3. Dominic Infante, Andrew Rancer, and Deanna Womack, Building

Communication Theory (Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press, 2003), 149.
4. Infante, Rancer, and Womack, Building Communication Theory, 150.


Chapter 10: And Ends in a Success

1. Stewart D. Friedman, "The Most Compelling Leadership Vision," Harvard

Business Review, May 8, 2009, https://hbr.org/2009/05/the-most-compellingleadership.

Chapter 11: People Want Your Brand to Participate in Their
Transformation

1. "Hello Trouble," Vimeo video, 1:44, posted by Adam Long, February 13, 2013,

https://vimeo.com/59589229.

