ut yourself all day long. To play the guide doesn't mean that you
go quiet and humble. In fact, you'll notice that Mary Poppins gets
much more screen time than George Banks, even though the story is
largely about his transformation. The key to playing the guide,
though, is to tell only the parts of your story that support your care
for the customer and your competency to help them.

As customers view our websites, commercials, or emails, they
simply want to check off a box in the back of their minds that gives
them confidence in our ability to help them. And our backstory can
help. I recently had dinner with Mary and Madison Lee, who run a
skin care line called Nēmah. The origin story of Nēmah serves as a
great example of a brand telling the part of its story that positions
the brand as the guide. In short, Mary had trouble finding a skin
care line she could trust during the pregnancy of her first child. It
turns out many skin care products are not safe for the mother and
are especially harmful for the development of a child. She and her
husband then created Nēmah's line of products using only
ingredients that are safe and healthy so that mothers would have a
brand they could trust. By tapping into a serious concern mothers
everywhere have in common and telling their own story about that
concern (empathy) along with the science they discovered in their
research (competency), they have built a phenomenally successful
brand positioning themselves as former struggling heroes turned
empathetic and competent guides who are helping other heroes win
the day.

There are five easy ways to add evidence of competency to your

marketing and messaging.

1. Testimonials: Let others do the talking for you. If you have
satisfied customers, place a few testimonials on your website.
Testimonials give potential customers the gift of going
second. They know others just like them who have bought
your products and experienced success. You don't need many
testimonials as long as they are short and speak directly to
how your product solved their problem. Three is a great


number to start with and will serve the need of ensuring that
most customers know that you know what you are doing.
Also, avoid rambling testimonials that heap endless praise on
your brand. It won't take long for a customer to trust you, so
keep a testimonial brief. If it looks too long, they won't read
it. Most customers scan websites. The shorter the sound
bites, the more they will engage and retain.

2. Statistics: How many satisfied customers have you helped?
How much money have you helped them save? A simple
statement like the email marketing platform Keap's "125,000
users trust [our] award-winning automation software"6 is all
your potential customer needs. Numeric evidence scratches
the itch of the left-brained consumer who loves numbers,
statistics, and facts.

3. Awards: If you've won a few awards for your work, feel free
to include small logos or indications of those awards at the
bottom of your page. These are hardly necessary, but if
you've got them, flaunt them a little. Awards go a long way in
earning your customer's trust, even if they've never heard of
the award.

4. Press Mentions: If you've been featured in the press,
simply state "Featured by" and the logo of the press that has
featured you. You can also list endorsements from either
press or influencers as a way of creating social proof that
demonstrates your competency.

5. Logos: If you provide a business-to-business product or
service, place logos of known businesses you've worked with
in your marketing collateral. Customers want to know you've
helped other businesses overcome their same challenges.
When your customer recognizes another business you've
worked with, it provides social proof you have the ability to
help them win the day.

Take a minute to scan your marketing material and ask yourself
whether you've provided evidence of competency. Remember, you


don't have to brag about yourself. Testimonials, logos, awards, press
mentions, and statistics will allow customers to check the "trust" box
in the back of their minds as it relates to your products or services.
Your customers are asking themselves questions like, "Does this
brand know what they're doing? Is investing my time and money
going to be worth it? Can they really help me solve my problem?"

HOW TO MAKE A GREAT FIRST IMPRESSION

When people meet your brand, it's as though they are meeting a
person. They're wondering if the two of you will get along, whether
you can help them live a better life, whether they want to associate
their identity with your brand, and ultimately, whether they can trust
you.

Harvard Business professor Amy Cuddy has spent more than
fifteen years studying how business leaders can make a positive first
impression. Cuddy distilled her research into two questions people
subconsciously ask when meeting someone new: "Can I trust this
person?" and "Can I respect this person?" In her book Presence,
Cuddy explains that human beings value trust so highly, it's only
after trust is established that a person begins to consider getting to
know us further.7

When we express empathy, we help our customers answer

Cuddy's first question, "Can I trust this person?"

Providing evidence of competency helps our customers answer

the second question, "Can I respect this person?"

The same two characteristics that help us make a great first
impression with people at a cocktail party also work to help our
brand make a great first impression with potential customers.

Once we express empathy and demonstrate competence, we can
position our brand as the guide our customer has been looking for.
This will make a significant difference in the way they remember us,


understand us, and ultimately become willing to engage with our
products and services.

That said, even though our customers like us and trust us, it
doesn't mean they're going to place an order. There is still a yawning
chasm between a customer's trust and their decision to invest their
hard-earned money in what we're offering. What are they looking for
next? We'll talk about an important aspect in the buying journey in
the next chapter.

For now, though, brainstorm how you can position yourself as
the guide in your customer's life by expressing empathy and
providing evidence of competency.

CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERS LISTEN

Go to StoryBrand.AI and either create a BrandScript or log in to
your existing BrandScript.
Either alone or with a team, brainstorm empathetic statements
you can make so your customers know you care about their
internal problem.
Brainstorm the many ways you can demonstrate competency by
exploring potential testimonials, statistics that demonstrate
competence, awards you've won, press mentions, or logos from
other businesses you've helped.
Once you finish your brainstorming session, make the two
StoryBrand BrandScript decisions that will allow you to fill out
section 3.




CHAPTER 7

WHO GIVES THEM A PLAN

StoryBrand Principle Four: Customers trust a
guide who gives them a plan in the form of baby
steps.

At this point in our customer's journey, we've identified something
they want, which got the story started. Then we proved we
understood their deepest challenges and pain points, which further
opened a story gap and drew them to our brand. Then we
introduced ourselves as the guide by expressing empathy and
providing evidence of competency, which helped establish trust. Yet
even with all this, the customer isn't likely to place an order. Some
customers will go ahead at this point and place an order, but a
percentage are wanting more.

If we've positioned ourselves as the guide, our customers likely
want to know more and are feeling hopeful that we can help them.
But feeling hopeful about our ability to help them and jumping into a
commitment by pulling out their pocketbooks are two different
things. When a customer places an order, they're essentially saying,
"I believe you can help me solve my problem, and I believe it so
much I'm willing to put skin in the game. I'm willing to part with my
hard-earned dollars."

Commitments are tricky for our customers because as soon as
they make a commitment, they run the risk of losing their money.
But more than their money, their time and their identity as a person
who makes smart buying decisions are also at risk. Most customers
are not going to take that chance just yet.


When a customer is deciding whether to buy something, we
should picture them standing on the edge of a large, rushing creek.
It's true they want what's on the other side of the creek, but as they
stand there, they hear a waterfall downstream. What happens if
they fall into the creek? What would life look like if they went over
those falls? These are the kinds of subconscious questions our
customers ponder as they hover their little arrow over the "Buy
Now" button. What if it doesn't work? What if I'm a fool for buying
this? How long will it take to work? What if I buy it and never use it?
Your customer is also asking another question: How do I get
from where I am to the place where I've adopted this new product
in my life? After all, your customer's life, as unstable as it is, is
familiar. And change is hard. So installing a new software or
changing toothpaste or living with a new schedule or driving
somewhere they've never been or changing banks or breakfast
routines or vitamin supplements presents a kind of mystery about
how life will be different, and that just seems like something they
are going to want to deal with tomorrow.

For years I wanted a new wearable fitness tracker called a
Whoop, and I mean for years. My friends had all raved about it and I
knew it would help me, but I had this subconscious cognitive
dissonance about whether I had to plug it in all the time or
download a smart phone application or enter my credit card or wear
it to bed. So I just put it off. It wasn't until I went to their website
and saw a simple three-step instruction on how to get started that I
bought the thing. Honestly, it took me all of three minutes to set it
up and start using it. To think I went years without buying it
because, well, adopting a new habit created a slight amount of
cognitive dissonance I just didn't want to deal with. That story may
sound silly, but I assure you there are thousands of people who
"feel" cognitive dissonance about your products or services, and if
you don't give them a few simple steps they can take to easily cross
from unknowing into knowing, they are less likely to spend money
with you.

Cognitive dissonance shows up in your customers' behavior as
is

indifference. Essentially, your customer

indecisiveness and


thinking, I've got this problem I need to solve but I can probably live
with it a little longer, so maybe I will just deal with finding the
solution tomorrow or the next day. Metaphorically, your customer is
stuck on the wrong side of the creek, but the shore is dry, so why
figure out how to cross the creek at all? In order to ease our
customers' concerns and relieve their cognitive dissonance, we need
to place large stones in that rushing creek. When we identify a few
baby steps our customers can take to get across the creek, we
remove much of the perceived risk and increase their comfort level
about placing an order. It's as though we're saying, "First, step here.
See, it's easy. Then step here, then here, and then you'll be on the
other side, and your problem will be resolved."

In the StoryBrand framework, we refer to these baby steps as a

plan.

Once, while consulting for a national mattress brand, I asked
their sales representatives to give the customer a three-step plan
just before asking for the order. Instead of saying, "Can I write this
mattress up for you?" the retail sales representative said, "The
process of buying a mattress from us works in three steps: you
choose a mattress; then we deliver it; then, if you want, we remove
your old mattress so you don't have to worry about how you will
dispose of it. This mattress seems to be the one that is perfect for
you. Would you like to make a purchase?" Not to my surprise, when
the mattress representatives inserted a simple three-step plan in the
sales process, sales went up. Why? Because cognitive dissonance
was removed before the sales rep asked for the money.

Whenever a customer says, "Let me think about it" or "Let me
get back to you," what they are really saying is that they've got
some cognitive dissonance and could use some space before making
a buying decision. Of course, nobody goes home with them to
answer questions and relieve the cognitive dissonance, so the
customer never places an order. To be sure, I don't think the
customer is trying to get out of placing an order; I think they
actually want to place an order, but as long as they feel that
cognitive dissonance, they aren't going to. Therefore, we've got to


relieve that cognitive dissonance right there in the conversation, or
in the email, or on the website, or even in the product sales copy.

Even in stories, the guide often gives the hero a plan. In the
movie Moneyball, for example, Peter Brand (the guide) gives Billy
Beane (the hero) a plan he can employ to turn his baseball team
around. In a series of steps, Billy will begin using an algorithm to
choose players rather than relying on anecdotal evidence from his
antiquated coaching staff. In the new way of running a baseball
team, Billy is going to begin to trust the numbers and run the team
the way a hedge-fund manager might run his hedge fund. Step one:
trust the numbers. Step two: turn the coaching culture around. Step
three: win games.

In Star Wars: A New Hope, Luke Skywalker is told to fly his Xwing fighter into the trench on the Death Star, shoot a photon
torpedo through an exhaust valve, and then get out of there before
the Death Star blows up. In other words, he's given a three-step
plan.

In nearly every movie you can think of, the guide gives the hero
a plan. The plan is the bridge the hero must cross in order to arrive
at the climactic scene. Rocky has to train using nontraditional
methods, Tommy Boy has to embark on a national sales trip, and
Juliet must drink the potion the apothecary gives her in order to trick
her family into thinking she's died so she can be free to run away
with Romeo.

A plan serves the narrative by narrowing the focus of the plot. It
also, quite pragmatically, gives the hero something to do that kills
twenty minutes in the second half of act 2.

THE PLAN ENCOURAGES THE CUSTOMER TO MOVE
FORWARD

In business, the plan can take many forms, but all effective plans do
two things: they clarify what doing business with us will look like and


they remove the sense of risk a customer might feel before
committing to our product or service.

Remember the mantra "If you confuse, you lose"? Not having a

plan is a guaranteed way to create cognitive dissonance.

After potential customers visit our website or listen to us give a
keynote or read an email we've sent, they're all wondering the same
thing: What would my next step be if I wanted to move forward? If
we don't clearly guide them with next steps, the customer
experiences a little bit of confusion, and because they can hear that
waterfall downstream, they use that confusion as an excuse not to
do business with us.

The fact we have communicated our offer clearly is not enough
to motivate our customer at this point. If we're selling a storage
system a customer can install in their garage, they hover over that
"Buy Now" button, subconsciously wondering whether it will work for
them, how hard it will be to install, and whether it will sit in boxes
unopened like the last product they bought. But when we spell out
how easy the storage system is to install and let them know they
can get started in three easy steps, they are more likely to place an
order.

Specifically, if you are selling garage shelves, you want to tell

them to

1. measure their space,
2. order the items that fit, and
3. install it in minutes using basic tools.

Even though these steps may seem obvious to the people who
made the product, the steps aren't obvious to the customer. Placing
stones in the creek greatly increases the chance the customer will
cross the creek.

THE PROCESS PLAN


At StoryBrand we've identified two plans you can use to effectively
encourage customers to do business with you. The first kind of plan,
and the one we recommend all our clients employ, is a process plan.
A process plan can describe the steps a customer needs to take
to buy our product, or the steps they need to take to use our
product after they buy it, or a mixture of both.

For instance, if you're selling an expensive, service-based

product, you might break down the steps like this:

1. Schedule an appointment.
2. Allow us to create a customized plan.
3. Let's execute the plan together.

Whether we're selling a financial product, a medical procedure, a
university education, or any other complicated solution, a process
plan takes the confusion out of our customer's journey by breaking
down the process into baby steps.

Another kind of process plan would be the post-purchase process
plan. This plan is best used when our customers might have
problems imagining how they would use our product after they buy
it. For instance, with a complicated piece of software, we might want
to spell out the steps or even the phases a customer would take
after they make the purchase:

1. Download the software.
2. Integrate your database into the new system.
3. Revolutionize your customer interaction.

The post-purchase process plan does the same thing as a prepurchase process plan in the sense that it alleviates confusion. When
a customer is looking at the wide span between themselves and the
integration of a complicated product, they're less likely to make a
purchase. But when they read your plan, they think to themselves,
Oh, I can do that. That's not so hard, and then they click "Buy Now."
A process plan can also combine the pre- and post-purchase

steps. For instance:


1. Test-drive a car.
2. Purchase the car.
3. Enjoy free maintenance for life.

Again, the key to any plan's success is to alleviate confusion
about next steps. What steps do they need to take to do business
with you? Spell out those steps, and it'll be as though you've paved
a sidewalk through a field. More people will cross the field.

We frequently get questions about how many steps a process
plan should have. The answer varies, of course, but we recommend
at least three and no more than six. If doing business with you
requires more than six steps, break down those steps into phases
and describe the phases. In reality, you might guide your customer
through twenty or thirty steps, but studies show when you bombard
customers with information, buying decreases.

Remember, the whole point of creating a plan is to alleviate
customers' confusion. Having more than four steps may actually add
to, rather than reduce, confusion. The key is to simplify their journey
so they are more likely to do business with you.

THE AGREEMENT PLAN

If process plans are about alleviating confusion, agreement plans are
about alleviating fears.

An agreement plan is best understood as a list of agreements
you make with your customers to help them overcome their fear of
doing business with you.

Earlier I talked about CarMax and how they resolve the
customer's agitation of having to deal with a used car salesman. One
of the tools they use to communicate that customers don't have to
encounter this internal fear is an agreement plan. CarMax's fourpoint agreement plan includes the promise that customers will never
have to haggle. Afraid you'll be stuck with a lemon? CarMax refuses


to sell a car that doesn't meet their standards, and they put every
car through a renewal process to be sure it earns their quality
certification seal.1

Today, CarMax sells more cars than its next three competitors
combined. In fact, not long ago, Automotive News named CarMax
the undisputed used car champion.2 As I mentioned in chapter 5,
CarMax rarely advertises the solution to their customers' external
problems (that is, the need for a used car). Instead, they focus on
their customers' internal problem, the fear of interacting with a used
car dealer, and they alleviate this fear with an agreement plan.

An agreement plan can also work to increase the perceived value
of a service you promise to provide. For instance, Newt Gingrich's
"Contract with America" is an example of an agreement plan. Newt
was a relatively unknown congressman from Georgia who led a
takeover in both houses of Congress by making an agreement with
voters. Newt simply took age-old conservative talking points, turned
them into a list, and said, "If you vote for us, we'll do all these
things." More than three hundred conservative legislators signed on,
and Newt became an overnight presidential hopeful.

Another benefit of an agreement plan is that it can work to clarify
shared values between our customers and us. Whole Foods' list of
values has attracted millions to their stores and works as an
is socially and
agreement to source
environmentally responsible.

in a way that

food

Unlike a process plan, an agreement plan often works in the
background. Agreement plans do not have to be featured on the
home page of your website (though they could be), but as
customers get to know you, they'll sense a deeper level to your
service and may realize why when they finally encounter your
agreement plan.

The best way to arrive at an agreement plan is to list all the
things your customer might be concerned about as it relates to your
product or service and then counter that list with agreements that
will alleviate those concerns.


If it's short enough (we're fans of brevity, obviously), you can
feature your agreement plan on the wall of your business or even on
your packaging or shopping bags.

WHAT'S THE PLAN CALLED?

Once you create your process or agreement plan (or both), consider
giving each plan a title that will formalize the plan in the minds of
your customers. For instance, your process plan might be called the
"easy installation plan" or the "world's best night's sleep plan." Your
agreement plan might be
the "customer satisfaction
titled
agreement" or even "our quality guarantee." Titling your plan will
frame it in the customer's mind and will increase the perceived
seriousness of your offer and your commitment to customer
satisfaction.

Now that you've given your customer a plan, they will be much
more likely to do business with you. You've lifted the fog, made the
baby steps clear, and alleviated their concerns, and now they are
ready to continue the journey.

Yet before many customers make a commitment, they will need
one more thing from you. They will need you to call them to action.
In other words, you're going to have to ask them for the money.
Sadly, very few business leaders enjoy asking for the money, but
that's because you're thinking of the transaction the wrong way. I'll
teach you the right and wrong ways to call customers to action in
the next chapter and, more importantly, I hope to transform you into
somebody who boldly represents their brand with pride.

First, though, spend some time defining the plan or plans you
want to implement to ease your customers' fears and guide them
toward next steps.

CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERS LISTEN


Go to StoryBrand.AI and either create a BrandScript or log in to
your existing BrandScript.
Either alone or with a team, brainstorm the simple steps a
customer would need to take to do business with you (either a
pre- or post-purchase process plan or a combination of both).
What fears do your customers have related to your industry?
What agreements could you make with your customers that
would alleviate those fears?
Do you share unique values with your customers? Can those
values be spelled out in an agreement plan?
Write the steps (and name) of your process plan on your
StoryBrand BrandScript. If you're creating an agreement plan,
simply use the notes section of your BrandScript to capture the
agreement you'll be making with your customers.



CHAPTER 8

AND CALLS THEM TO ACTION

StoryBrand Principle Five: Customers do not take
action unless they are challenged to take action.

At this point in the story we are inviting our customer into, they are
identified their challenges,
excited. We've defined a desire,
empathized with their frustrations, proved our competency, and
given them a plan. But they still need us to do one more thing: they
need us to call them to action.

ASK THEM TO PLACE AN ORDER

In stories, characters never take action on their own. They have to
be challenged to take action. Tom Cruise's character would never
have journeyed to pick up his brother in the movie Rain Man unless
he'd received a call explaining his father had died. Romeo wouldn't
have climbed into the Capulet courtyard unless he'd fallen hopelessly
in love with Juliet. Elle Woods wouldn't have applied to Harvard
unless she'd been dumped by her boyfriend. Liam Neeson's
character wouldn't have chased the bad guys to Europe unless his
daughter had been kidnapped.

The reason characters have to be provoked into taking action is
because everybody sitting in the dark theater knows human beings
do not make major changes in their lives unless something
challenges them to do so.


If I wrote a story about a guy who wanted to climb Everest and
then one day looked at himself in the mirror and decided to do it,
the audience would feel that something was wrong in the story itself.
Making sudden decisions to change and then taking action on that
decision is not how human beings operate. Bodies at rest tend to
stay at rest, and so do customers. Heroes need to be challenged by
outside forces.

Have you ever wondered why late-night infomercial hosts keep
screaming, "Call now! Don't delay!" over and over as though they're
trying to wake people up from a zombie trance? They do that
because they're trying to wake people up from a zombie trance.

Your customers are bombarded with more than three thousand
commercial messages per day, and unless we are bold in our calls to
action, we will be ignored. If our calls to action are soft, they will not
be noticed.

Do Not Put Customers in the Mind-Reading Business

A mentor once gave me terrific leadership advice that also
applies to marketing and messaging: do not put people in the mindreading business. He was emphasizing the need to communicate
clearly. If you think people are able infer what you mean, you're
mistaken. People who get what they want know how to ask in clear,
simple language. And if you want customers to place an order, you,
too, should ask using clear, simple language.

When it's time to ask for the order, we often use phrases like "If
you're interested, let me know," but let's think about the passivity of
that statement for a moment. Put yourself in the mind of the
customer when they hear a statement like that. What ideas are they
actually having to process subconsciously in response to that
statement? Am I interested? I'm not sure. How would I contact you?
What happens if I'm not interested? Is there going to be weirdness
between us if I decide not to buy? What if the product doesn't work
for me? Why aren't you going to contact me? Why do I have to be
the one who contacts you? And the saddest thought that a customer


could have is, I'm ready to place an order now, but this guy wants
me to contact him later. I hope I remember to do that.

Next time you're closing a sale, try this statement instead: If
you're struggling with "X," which it sounds like you are, I think
buying "Y" is the right decision. I can take your order now and you
won't have to struggle with "X" anymore. Would you like to place an
order right now?

When I'm asked to speak to a group of sales professionals, I
often ask the audience to pull out their laptops so we can write a
sales email right there in the room. I ask them to hold up their hand
if they have a client sitting on the fence, and of course every hand in
the room goes up. I then walk them through a formula for a followup email using the SB7 framework, and we end with the call to
action I just included for you above. Then, I tell the audience to hit
"Send." Without exception, those emails have resulted in thousands
and often millions in sales. In fact, the process works so well that
my team and I guarantee that we will close more in sales during the
training sessions themselves than we were paid to be there. We've
never failed to deliver. In fact, the last time I guided a group of 250
account executives for a company called Calix, a growing broadband
infrastructure and support provider for broadband services, through
the process they closed more than 2.5 million in sales off the emails
that went out during a single hour of the training. The CFO called
my office a few days later to say he'd never seen anything like it in
all his years in business. Why did that sales team close so many
sales? Because the customers on the other end of those emails had
experienced empathy and clarity about the problem they were facing
and assurance that Calix's products would solve those problems.
Those emails positioned the customer as the hero and the account
executive as the guide, and they gave the client confidence that
their story would end well. Plus, the calls to action were clear: Our
product will solve your problem; would you like to place an order
now?

The Power of the "Buy Now" Button


I have a friend who has bought and sold nearly one hundred
companies. He knows a lot about scaling a business, and as he
evaluates a company, he makes sure the people, products, and
procedures are all healthy. But the key ingredient he looks for before
he will buy a company is whether the sales process is correctly
challenging their customers to place orders. Why? Because my friend
knows the fastest way to grow a business is to make the calls to
action clear and then repeat them over and over. He's made millions
simply buying companies, creating stronger calls to action, and then
selling those businesses after the revenue predictably increases.

One of the biggest hindrances to business success is wrongly
assuming customers can read our minds. It's obvious to us that we
want them to place an order (why else would we be talking to them
about our products?), so we assume it's obvious to them too. It isn't.
Specifically, as it relates to marketing, there should be a "Buy
Now" button in the top right corner of your website, and it shouldn't
be cluttered with a bunch of other buttons. Your "Buy Now" button
should be the obvious button to press, meaning it should be
featured in a different font or a brighter color than the other buttons
on the page. In short, your "Buy Now" or "Add to Cart" or "Schedule
a Call" button should be the obvious button to press. The same call
to action should be repeated above the fold and in the center of the
header on your website, and then featured again and again as
customers scroll down your page.

Companies that don't make their calls to action clear remind me
of my dating days before I met my wife. Instead of clearly asking a
girl out, I'd say something like, "If you ever want to get coffee, I'd
be up for that. Do you like coffee?"

What in the world is a woman supposed to do with a question

like that? That's just not how you make a baby.

As I got older I realized the power of clarity. In fact, the way my
wife and I got together was probably the clearest I've communicated
about anything. I'd known Betsy from a distance for a while, but
when I finally got up the courage to ask her out, I discovered she
had a boyfriend. Still, I'd been passive long enough. I'd been hoping
she'd notice how much I liked her even as I doled out vague and


passive hints. It was time for a strong call to action. The next time I
saw her, I told her how I really felt and that I'd like to call her in
thirty days to ask her out. I said she'd need to ditch the other guy to
keep things from being awkward.

Amazingly, thirty days later, she was out of that relationship and
we started dating. About a year later we got married. And now we
have a baby. Turns out the StoryBrand framework is effective in a lot
more than marketing, but I will save that for a later book.

The moral of the story is to make your call to action clear by
asking customers a yes/no question. Statements like "If you're
interested, let me know" do not prompt our customers to accept or
reject our offer and instead send them off into a whirlwind of
confusion. The chances of our customers going home, pouring a
drink, and meditating on our vague offer are next to zero, so don't
expect to close many sales if you're passive and confusing.

When I was a kid there was a guy on late-night television who
used to saw mattresses in half with a chainsaw. He'd scream at the
camera that he'd gone crazy and was slashing prices on all kinds of
furniture. He was effective, but he also looked a little foolish. A lot of
us are afraid to ask for the sale because we don't want to look like
an infomercial pitch man, but very few people reading this book are
ever going to come off as pushy. Of the thousands of clients we've
worked with, we've yet to encounter anybody who oversells. Most
people think they're overselling when, in truth, their calls to action
fall softer than a whisper.

Do You Believe in Your Product?

When we try to sell passively, we communicate a lack of belief in
our product. When we don't ask for the sale clearly, the customer
senses weakness. When we are vague, our customers think we're
asking them for charity rather than standing in the confidence that
our product can change their lives. Customers aren't looking for
brands that are filled with doubt and in need of affirmation; they're
looking for brands that have solutions to their problems.


If we can change our customer's story for the better, why
shouldn't we be bold about inviting them to do business with us?
The guide in a movie must be direct about what they want the hero
to do; otherwise, the guide comes off as weak and the audience
experiences cognitive dissonance and loses interest.

Two Kinds of Calls to Action

At StoryBrand, we recommend two kinds of calls to action: direct
calls to action and transitional calls to action. These calls to action
work in two different phases of the guide/hero relationship.

Let's say we ask a customer to buy but they aren't ready. Who
knows why, but they aren't ready. There's no reason to end the
relationship just because they want more time. In fact, most
customers, especially if the item is expensive or if the sales process
is complicated, rightly need more time. If this is the case, we want
to deepen the relationship so that whenever they are ready, they will
remember us. The way I deepen that relationship is through
transitional calls to action.

Direct calls to action include requests like "buy now," "schedule
an appointment," or "call today." A direct call to action is something
that leads to a sale or at least is the first step down a path that
leads to a sale.

Transitional calls to action, however, do not require a purchase
but do require some sort of commitment that further builds toward a
trusting relationship. Transitional calls to action can be used to "onramp" potential customers to an eventual purchase. Inviting people
to watch a webinar or download a PDF are good examples of
transitional calls to action.

To further the relational metaphor, a transitional call to action is
like asking your customer, "Can I take you out on a date?" and a
direct call to action is like popping the question, "Will you marry
me?"

In our marketing collateral, we always want to have a direct call
to action and a transitional call to action. A metaphorical
conversation with our customers goes like this:


Us: Will you marry me?
Customer: No.
Us: Will you go out with me again?
Customer: Yes.
Us: Will you marry me now?
Customer: No.
Us: Will you go out with me again?
Customer: Sure, you're interesting and the information you

provide is helpful. I will go out with you again.

Us: Will you marry me?
Customer: Okay, I'll marry you now.

As a brand, it's our job to pursue our customers. We want to get
to know them and for them to get to know us, but we are the ones
who need to take the initiative and keep the relationship alive and
flourishing, even if they aren't ready to place an order.

THOSE WHO ASK AGAIN AND AGAIN SHALL FINALLY
RECEIVE

Now that you've read this chapter, you will begin to notice how good
brands build relationships, even using text on landing pages, lead
generators, and emails. Years ago I was preparing a keynote
presentation for a global shampoo brand and my graphic designer
was too busy with other projects to help. Not wanting to wait, I
decided to outsource the presentation to a design house. I went
looking online for a shop that dealt specifically with presentations
and found two local houses that could help.

The first website I visited was beautifully designed--including a
looping video loaded beneath text that explained the design house's
values and priorities. After about twenty seconds admiring the look
of their site, though, I started searching for information about how
to do business with them. I couldn't find anything. They featured


samples of previous projects, a few testimonials, and a phone
number I could call but no direct, clear call to action. So I decided to
check out their competitor's site.

The other company's site wasn't nearly as beautiful, but it dared
to be clear. "If you're worried about a presentation, we can help you
hit a grand slam." The truth is I was worried about my presentation,
and they spoke to my internal fear. They also painted a picture of a
climactic scene: hitting a grand slam. Then they asked me out: They
offered a PDF called "5 Things Great Presenters Get Right," and I
was quite curious. I downloaded the PDF and read it in a few
minutes. Their transitional call to action earned my trust and
positioned them as the guide in my story. They had authority, it
seemed, because in the lead generator they talked about all the
other leaders they had helped. Then they sent me emails with
helpful information about giving good keynotes. Each email would
ask me to schedule a call, but for the first couple of weeks I ignored
that request. After reading yet another helpful email, though, about
two weeks out, I clicked on a link that took me back to their
website. On their website, they had a clear and bright "Schedule a
Call" button, and because they'd wined and dined me, I did. I
scheduled a call. I never went back to the initial designer's website
(which, remember, was much better looking) because, although they
had an impressive-looking site, they'd failed to build a trusting
relationship with me, and before long I was gladly writing a check
for several thousand dollars to the company that had clearly built a
relationship over time and then challenged me to take action.

Direct Calls to Action

It bears repeating: there should be one obvious button to press
on your website, and that button should be the direct call to action.
When I say, "one obvious button," I don't mean "only one button"
but rather one that stands out.

Our customers should always know we want to marry them. Even
if they're not ready, we should keep letting them know where we'd
like the relationship to go. Customers don't buy when we are ready


for them to buy; they buy only when two realities overlap: they
realize they have a problem and they remember you have a solution.
If they don't have a problem, they aren't going to place an order; if
they do have a problem but forgot you have a solution, they will
make a purchase from somebody else who had made the effort to
ask them out, spend time with them, and build trust. You just never
know when a customer is going to want to make a commitment, and
when they do, you want to be on one knee, holding flowers, smiling
for the picture.

Examples of direct calls to action are

Order now
Call today
Schedule an appointment
Register today
Buy now

Direct calls to action can be included at the end of every email
blast, on signage, in our radio ads, and even in our television
commercials. Consider including direct calls to action in every team
member's email signature and, if you really want to get the point
across, on all your business cards. The idea is to make it very clear
what we'd like customers to do: to make a purchase so we can help
them solve their problem.

Transitional Calls to Action

Direct calls to action are simple and obvious (though ridiculously
underused), but transitional calls to action can be equally as
powerful to grow your business. In fact, StoryBrand grew into a
multimillion-dollar company in only its second year based solely on
the use of a transitional call to action. Recognizing that most of our
clients were using the StoryBrand framework to fix their websites,
we released a free PDF called "5 Things Your Website Should
Include," and thousands of people downloaded it. At the back of the
PDF we placed an ad for our StoryBrand Marketing Workshop. In the


next twelve months, we doubled revenue on our workshops without
spending a dollar on marketing.

A good transitional call to action can do three powerful things for

your brand:

1. Stake a claim to your territory. If you want to be known
as the leader in a certain territory, stake a claim to that
territory before the competition beats you to it. Creating a
PDF, a video series, or anything else that positions you as the
expert is a great way to establish authority.

2. Create reciprocity. I've never worried about giving away
too much free information. In fact, the more generous a
brand is, the more reciprocity they create. All relationships
are give-and-take, and the more you give to your customers,
the more likely it is they will give something back in the
future. Give freely.

3. Position yourself as the guide. When you help your
customers solve a problem, even for free, you position
yourself as the guide. The next time they encounter a
problem in that area of their lives, they will look to you for
help.

Transitional calls to action come in all shapes and sizes. Here are

a few ideas to create transitional calls to action of your own:

Free information: Create a white paper or free PDF
educating customers about your field of expertise. This will
position you as a guide in their story and create reciprocity.
Educational videos, podcasts, webinars, and even live events
are great transitional calls to action that on-ramp customers
toward a purchase.
Testimonials: Creating a video or PDF including testimonials
from happy clients creates a vision of a climactic scene in your
customer's mind. When they see others experience a


successful ending to their story, they will want that same
ending for themselves.
Samples: If you can give away free samples of your product,
do it. Offering a customer the ability to test-drive a car, taste
your seasoning, sample your music, or read a few pages of
your book are great ways to introduce potential customers to
your products.
Free trial: Offering a limited-time free trial works as a riskremoval policy that also on-ramps your customers. Once they
try your product, they may not be able to live without it.

Connecting the Dots

Earlier this year StoryBrand worked with a clinic that specialized
in health screening, drug testing, treating minor sicknesses, and
giving shots. The primary traffic the clinic received was through
businesses who needed their employees to complete drug tests,
which provided a steady stream of predictable revenue. Still, the
clinic was stagnant in growth. Customers were coming in to get one
product but weren't aware of anything else the clinic offered.

Upon visiting the clinic, one of our StoryBrand marketing coaches
noticed they were missing a clear, direct, and transitional call to
action.

Patients would come into the shop, sign and date an entry form,
then sit in the lobby reading magazines or watching television while
they waited for a nurse. As one of our StoryBrand certified coaches
consulted with the clinic, she told the owner to remove the television
and magazines. Instead, she encouraged them to create a
transitional call to action called "The Healthy Body Checklist,"
allowing patients to self-assess their health. The checklist included
questions like, "Do you feel tired at about two in the afternoon every
day?" and "Are you satisfied with your current weight?" After
patients finished their drug or blood tests, we suggested that nurses
review the checklist with each patient and let them know about
solutions that were also available at the clinic. The receptionist could
then enter the customer's data into their email marketing system


and, based on how a patient was tagged, an automated campaign
would go into effect. If the customer seemed like they needed more
vitamin B, they'd get a series of emails explaining the benefits of a
monthly vitamin B shot, along with clear calls to action directing the
patient to make another appointment. What happened? Sales, of
course, increased. And why? Because the nurses provided a
transitional call to action that identified the customer's problems and
then the clinic built a trusting relationship with each new client via
an automated email campaign.

Is there a transitional call to action you can create that will grow
your business? Are your direct calls to action clear and repeated
often? If not, your customers likely don't know what you want them
to do. Remember, people are drawn to clarity and away from
confusion. Having clear calls to action means customers aren't
confused about the actions they need to take to do business with
you, and having transitional calls to action increases the length and
depth of the relationship you are building with customers.

WHAT ARE THE STAKES?

At this point in the optimizing of your messaging and marketing
using the StoryBrand framework, customers are going to start
placing orders. But let's not stop. How can we make the story we are
inviting customers into so enticing that they can't wait to do
business with us?

To do this, we must define the stakes. What's at stake in the
customer's story if they do or do not choose to buy our product? If
we've not defined the stakes, we've missed the opportunity to make
the story interesting.

In the next two modules, I'll teach you how to increase a sense
of intrigue and urgency with your brand by defining exactly what's at
stake.


Before we move forward, though, continue clarifying your
business by brainstorming potential calls to action you can include in
your StoryBrand BrandScript.

CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO YOUR CUSTOMERS LISTEN

Go to StoryBrand.AI and either create a BrandScript or log in to
your existing BrandScript.
Decide what direct call to action you want to include in your
marketing material.
Brainstorm any transitional calls to action you can create that
will stake a claim to your territory, create reciprocity with your
customers, further build a relationship, and position your brand
as a guide.
Fill out the "Call to Action" section of your StoryBrand
BrandScript.
To learn more about our sales training, visit
StoryBrandSalesTransformation.com



CHAPTER 9

THAT HELPS THEM AVOID FAILURE

StoryBrand Principle Six: Every human being is
trying to avoid a tragic ending.

A story endears an audience based on its ability to generate
interest in a single question: Will the hero succeed or fail in
accomplishing their objective? To encourage the audience to care
about the hero and their objective, a good storyteller employs wellworn narrative tactics. For example, the first thing the storyteller
must do is make the hero relatable and sympathetic: This is why so
many stories begin by showing you how the hero became an
orphan. Orphans are sympathetically endearing to every human
being because orphans are almost always innocent creatures who
are lost and in need of completion, which is a state humans find
themselves in several times each week. All of us feel like orphans
from time to time, even if we had terrifically attentive parents. To
feel like an orphan, in the psychological sense, is to realize that your
life is your own and in the end you're going to have to take
responsibility for that life in your search for completion. In a
meaningful narrative treatment, then, the completion the hero must
find takes on a symbolic form of some sort, such as accomplishment
(Daniel winning the karate tournament in The Karate Kid) or
relational fulfillment (every romantic comedy you can think of) or a
return to home (Lord of the Rings and all the Benji movies). In
short, the storyteller's job is to make us care about the hero as long
as it takes for the story to feel like a difficult and transformative
journey. This is all fairly easy to accomplish by establishing an early


hardship (a hero in a hole) and then stating a clear objective (the
hero standing on the edge of the hole, reflecting back on how the
journey changed them.) The hard job of the storyteller, though, is
stretching it all out for ninety minutes or two hours or, in the case of
a narrative series, several seasons on Netflix. So how do the
storytellers elongate the plot so they can get a full-length feature
out of the story idea? They interject conflict and then dangle high
stakes.

In a previous chapter we talked about your customers' problems
and how important it is to understand them and speak of them
often. You will remember that the more you speak of your
customers' problems, the more likely they are to buy your products.
But speaking of your customers' problems will be twice as effective if
you add one more element to your campaign--negative stakes.

In storytelling, narrative stakes are what's at play based on
whether the hero accomplishes their objective. The higher a
storyteller can raise the stakes, the more the audience leans in to
find out what will happen.

Throughout a story, storytellers foreshadow a potential successful
ending and a potential tragic ending. The audience remains in
suspense as long as the storyteller keeps the hero teetering on the
precipice of success and failure. The key here is to use stakes in the
story to shorten the audience's leash.

Need to raise the stakes in a romantic comedy? Have the young
woman fall in love with the hero's brother, who, by the way, is a jerk
and a bully and a con artist. Then, continue to show the bully
brother reeling in the romantic interest through lies and deception,
all the while making the audience cringe at how horribly this story
might end. If the young woman marries the con artist brother, both
her life and the life of the hero will be ruined. Of course, any time
the storyteller needs to heighten a sense of urgency, they can simply
pull on the "make the brother do something awful" lever and the
audience will lean in even more.

Storytellers use stakes as plot devices all the time, and in our
journey to clarify our brand's message, we can learn something from
this proven tactic. The question we must then ask ourselves as we


clarify our message is, What can be won or lost in our customers'
lives if they do or do not purchase our products?

The only two motivated actions a hero can take in a story are to
move away from something bad or move toward something good.
Such is life. Our desire to avoid pain motivates us to seek a
resolution to our problems.

If a storyteller doesn't clearly let an audience know what nogood, terrible, awful thing might befall their hero unless she
overcomes her challenge, the story will have no stakes, and a story
without stakes will lose favor with an audience--fast.

As a rule, each scene in a movie must provide a clear answer to
the "stakes" question--that is, What's at stake in this scene for the
hero? Every conversation, every chase scene, every sentimental and
reflective montage should serve the movie in the same way: it must
move the character either closer to or further from the tragic result
that might befall them.

We kept turning the pages of Charlotte Brontë's Jane Eyre based
on our suspicion that Edward Rochester was hiding something even
darker than we first suspected.

We sat on the edge of our seats in the movie Jaws because we
knew that more citizens of Amity Island might be killed by the shark
if Chief Martin Brody didn't do something.

Imagine a story in which nothing bad could befall the hero.
Imagine a love story in which everything went well for the couple
straight through to the beautiful and tension-free wedding. Imagine
an action movie in which the bomb the hero had to destroy was
actually a dud and nobody was ever in actual danger. Would an
audience care?

The lesson for those of us clarifying our brand message is this:
brands that don't paint the stakes fail to answer the "so what"
question every customer is secretly asking.

WHERE'S THE MAYHEM?


Allstate Insurance's long-running Mayhem campaign features dozens
of commercials featuring actor Dean Winters humorously portraying
various maladies such as raccoons in the attic or a raging fire started
by a barbecue grill at a tailgating party. The idea is to humorously
remind people why they need insurance. Mayhem, then, is always
contrasted against the peaceful stability of life protected by Allstate,
buttoned up with the reflective question, "Are you in good hands?"

In 2015, Allstate, along with the advertising agency Leo Burnett,
took the campaign to a terrifically entertaining level. During the
Sugar Bowl on New Year's Day, Allstate launched a campaign called
Project Share Aware. The idea was to make people aware that
sharing their whereabouts on social media might tip off criminals
about when to burglarize their homes.

To announce the project, Allstate found a real couple and led
them to believe they'd won a prize. They visited the couple in their
home, secretly taking pictures of their household items. Later, they
recreated their home on a soundstage, complete with duplicates of
their belongings. The couple was then invited to attend the Sugar
Bowl and given their own private box. During the game, Mayhem
began auctioning off the couple's belongings on national television.
People were directed to Mayhemsale.com for bargain-basement
prices on everything from the couple's used car to an old tuba. As
the couple watched their possessions being sold on the big screens
at the game, hidden cameras caught their reactions and broadcast
their actual panic on live television.

Of course,

the couple's actual possessions were safe.
Nevertheless, the campaign agitated a fear in many Americans. In
fact, news outlets all over the country, including ABC News, Wall
Street Journal, and the New York Times, covered the story.
Suddenly, the threat of criminals walking into our homes as we
announce our distant whereabouts on social media became a
national fear.

The result of the campaign for Allstate? Mayhemsale.com
received six to ten thousand hits per second immediately following
each commercial. The site received more than eighteen million hits
during the game. Also, #Mayhemsale trended in the top ten


hashtags during the game, and immediately after the commercials
aired, it surged to number one worldwide. Mayhem's X followers
(then Twitter) increased by twenty-four thousand during the game,
and the first commercial of the campaign resulted in more than
twenty million impressions on Facebook and almost seventy
thousand likes.1 Allstate had, in the course of one football game,
foreshadowed a potential failure (stakes) for their customers and
sold an insurance product that would protect them, both opening a
dark psychological story loop and offering a product to close it in a
single campaign.

Of course, we don't all have access to the millions it takes to
create a campaign like this, but the benefits of featuring the
potential pitfalls of not doing business with us are much easier to
include than we may think. Blog subjects, email content, and bullet
points on our website can all include elements of potential failure to
give our customers a sense of urgency when it comes to our
products and services.

WHAT'S THERE TO LOSE?

As it relates to negative stakes in our marketing, the obvious
question is, What will the customer lose if they don't buy our
products?

Some of you just cringed. I understand. I used to cringe when I
thought about "warning" my customers about imminent doom too.
Why wouldn't I? The last thing I want to be is a fearmonger,
because it's true that fearmongers can give customers the cringe.
But fearmongering is not the problem 99.9 percent of business
leaders struggle with. In our messaging, most of us actually
generate the opposite dynamic in the minds of our customers
because we don't define the negative stakes of the story we are
inviting customers into, and this presents us as uninteresting.
Remember, if there are no stakes in the story, there is no story.


In a good movie, you must be able to pause the screen and
define what is at stake both in the overall story and in the specific
scene itself. For instance, if we pause Jason Bourne midscene, we
must be able to easily decipher that if he doesn't figure out who he
is and who is out to get him, the mysterious bad guys will win and
he will die, and if he doesn't get out of this house before the hit
team shoots him, he will die here and now. In other words, there are
stakes and then substakes at play from the first minute of the movie
to the last.

The same must be true in your marketing and messaging. If I am
perusing your landing page, I must know what the stakes are if I do
or don't buy your product, and if you send me an email telling me
about your product, there must be stakes in the email too. If you are
giving me an elevator pitch, those stakes must be repeated. And by
the way, if you are offering a lead-generating PDF, there must be
stakes as to whether I download it; and if I do, there must be stakes
as to whether I read it; and if I do read it, the stakes must be clear
as to whether I buy your product and also whether I buy by
midnight tonight. Too many stakes? Almost never. Can there be too
many stakes in an action movie? And don't you want the story you
are inviting customers into to be as engaging as an action movie?

Too many of our messaging campaigns play out with the slowmoving urgency of a French art film that has no commercial appeal
save for the avant-garde, twenty-something wannabe-writer using
the film to bolster their fragile artistic identity as a way to feel
superior over others, despite the fact that it failed to attract the
women they wanted and that the money they squandered producing
it could have been better spent lining the tip jar of a good therapist.
Speaking for a friend.

Human Beings Are Motivated by Loss Aversion

Emphasizing potential loss is more than just good storytelling; it's
good behavioral economics. In 1979, Nobel Memorial Prize-winner
Daniel Kahneman published a theory about why people make certain
buying decisions. Prospect theory, as it is called, espoused that


people are more likely to be dissatisfied with a loss than they are to
be satisfied with a gain. In other words, people hate losing one
hundred dollars more than they like winning one hundred dollars.
The study proved that loss aversion is a greater motivator of buying
decisions than potential gains. In fact, according to Kahneman, in
certain situations, people are two to three times more motivated to
make a change to avoid a loss than they are to achieve a gain.2

Loss aversion can be employed any time we need to convince
people to make the right decision. When Lyndon Baines Johnson
worked to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964, he faced undying
pressure from political leaders across the South. One of the principal
leaders who refused to endorse the legislation was George Wallace,
then governor of Alabama. Wallace had no vote on the bill, but his
influence threatened its passage all the same. At a crucial moment in
the negotiations, Johnson sat Wallace down and explained he'd
better get on the right side of history. Johnson said that Wallace's
legacy hung in the balance, that people would either build a statue
in his honor or he'd be remembered for instigating hate. The choice
was his. In other words, Johnson spelled out the narrative structure
of his leadership effort and emphasized the stakes, including the
potential of the governor's tarnished legacy. The civil rights bill, of
course, was passed.

So how do we use messages from the failure category in our
StoryBrand BrandScript? In Dominic Infante, Andrew Rancer, and
Deanna Womack's book Building Communication Theory, they
propose a four-step process called a "fear appeal."

First, we must make a reader (or listener) know they are

vulnerable to a threat. I'll use a simple marketing narrative for
a pest-control business as an example:

"Nearly 30 percent of all homes have evidence of termite

infestation."

Second, we should let the reader know that since they're

vulnerable, they should take action to reduce their
vulnerability.


"Since termites will destroy your home, you should do

something about it to protect your investment."

Third, we should let them know about a specific call to action

that protects them from the risk.

"At ACME Pest Control, we offer a complete home
treatment that will ensure your house is free of termites."
Fourth, we should challenge people to take this specific action.

"To enjoy a 10 percent discount, call us today and

schedule your home treatment."3

Essentially, Infante, Rancer, and Womack present a soft way of
agitating a fear and then highlight a path that would return readers
or listeners to peace and stability, saving them from the negative
stakes at play in the story.

The stakes in a story can be quite serious. If you are a doctor,
stating the negative stakes clearly can save lives. Sure, you may
disturb a patient or two as you explain that they need to change
their diet or remember to take their medication, but isn't disrupting
their comfort worth it if you are saving their lives?

Make no mistake, the words that describe negative stakes matter.
If there is something serious at stake, state it clearly. Sometimes a
warning may feel like bad news, but if that warning will prevent
devastation, say it boldly.

Fear Is Salt in the Recipe

We do not need to use a great deal of fear in the story if we
want to see results. Just a pinch of salt in the recipe will do. While
we do need to communicate something from the failure category in
order to complete our BrandScript, too many warnings about
imminent doom will run the risk of turning customers off.

Infante, Rancer, and Womack explain why:

When receivers of negative messaging are either very fearful
or very unafraid, little attitude or behavior change results.
High levels of fear are so strong that individuals block them


out; low levels are too weak to produce the desired effect.
Messages containing moderate amounts of fear-rousing
content are most effective in producing attitudinal and/or
behavior change.4

The lesson here is that we mustn't let a fear of negative
messaging keep us from using it, because if we don't use negative
messaging, our campaign will fail to stimulate action. That said, we
can't overuse it either. In my view, though, almost nobody reading
this book will overuse it. Instead, most of us will let our fear of
negative messaging cause us to make the larger mistake, which is to
use so little of it, or to keep the negative messaging so vague, that it
fails to enhance our message and create urgency. For me, this is the
general rule: when I am slightly uncomfortable with the negativity of
my message, I add a little more and then stop. In my experience,
my feeling that I'm being negative is shared only half by the person
hearing the message.

Another truth to consider is that your negative message is mostly
converted into a positive message if you're marrying those warnings
with an offer of redemption. For instance, ask yourself if the
following story is happy or sad:

A man went into a bank with a gun and held ten people
hostage, including a small child. The child cried as the man
brandished the gun and yelled at the hostages to lay still.
Police called in to the bank, but the robber would not answer
the phone. It wasn't until the mother of the child began
speaking to the robber, identifying with his frustrations about
the unfairness of the economy and sympathizing with the
robber's plight, that the robber let the hostages go and was
later apprehended safely.

Do you read that as a sad story or a happy story? Most readers
would say that the story is a feel-good story because it has a happy
ending, yet the story is about a potentially violent criminal


threatening the lives of the innocent, including a child. In fact, there
are many more negative characteristics to the story than there are
positive, yet the soft plot points of empathy and compassion and
allowing the hostages to go free color the rest of the story. The
principle is, the darker the story gets, the brighter the light is at the
end of the tunnel.
As business

important to understand that
emphasizing the negative consequences in play only makes placing
the order a more hopeful and happy conclusion. In other words, the
bad makes the good even better.

leaders,

is

it

WHAT ARE YOU HELPING YOUR CUSTOMER AVOID?

What negative consequences are you helping customers avoid?
Could your customers lose money if they don't place an order? Are
there health risks in play if your customers avoid your services?
What about opportunity costs? Could they make or save more
money with you than with a competitor? Could your customers'
quality of life decline if they pass up your offer? What is the cost of
not doing business with you?

If you're a financial adviser, for example, the list of what you're

helping customers avoid might look like this:

Confusion about how your money is being invested
Not being ready for retirement
A lack of transparency from your financial adviser
A lack of one-on-one interaction with your adviser
Hidden fees

In your marketing copy, you can even imagine a tragic scene that
might befall your customers if they don't engage. In an email or on a
landing page, a financial adviser might write something like this:


"Don't postpone your retirement. You've worked too hard for too

long to not enjoy time with your grandchildren."

Here are a few examples of what StoryBrand clients are helping

their customers avoid:

Perkins Motorplex (used cars)

Getting ripped off by a used car salesman
Being stuck with a lemon
Feeling taken advantage of

Rely Technology (audio and video for the home)

Living in a boring home
Nobody will want to watch the game at your house
You need a PhD to turn on your television

Aerospace Market Entry (manufacturer of aerospace equipment)

Product failure, damaging your reputation
Inefficient production
Being passed by the competition

Win Shape Camps (summer camp for kids)

A long, boring summer
A bunch of restless kids in your house
Regret about having wasted the summer

You can see how including these ideas in each client's marketing
material gave the story they invited customers into a sense of
intrigue and urgency.

In this module of your StoryBrand BrandScript, you're given only
a few bullet points. You'll notice you're given a great deal more in
the success module. This, of course, is on purpose. You'll need only
a few terrible, dastardly, awful things to warn your customers about
in order to create the necessary sense of urgency. Too much


negativity and your customers will resist you, but if you use too little
they won't know why your products even matter.

Once we've defined the negative stakes, your customers will be
motivated to resist failure. In the next chapter, we'll dramatically
increase their motivation by helping them imagine how great life
could be once they buy your product or service. After your
customers understand what you offer and how it can make their
lives better, you'll have included stakes in the story you are inviting
them into, and customer engagement will increase. First, though,
let's warn customers about the consequences of not doing business
with you.

CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERS LISTEN

Go to StoryBrand.AI and either create a BrandScript or log in to
your existing BrandScript.
Brainstorm the negative consequences you are helping your
customers avoid.
Write down at least three of those consequences on your
StoryBrand BrandScript.



CHAPTER 10

AND ENDS IN A SUCCESS

StoryBrand Principle Seven: Never assume
people know how your brand can change their
lives. Tell them.

Years ago, a friend gave me good leadership advice. He said, "Don,
always remember, people want to be taken somewhere. Figure out
where you want to take them and state it clearly, then repeat
yourself over and over until you get them there."

I've found that advice applies to my family, my team, the books I
write, and the speeches I give. And it certainly applies to my brand
messaging.

Where is your brand taking people? Are you taking them to
financial security? To the day when they'll move into their dream
home? To a fun weekend with friends? Stories are about people who
are going places, and, perhaps without knowing it, every potential
customer we meet is asking us where our brand can take them.

Clarifying the message of your brand, at its core, is about
leadership. The job of your brand is to guide the hero out of a hole
and into a better life. And casting a vision might be the most
important element in any leadership campaign. Ronald Reagan
envisioned America as a shining city on a hill. Bill Clinton promised to
build a bridge to the twenty-first century. Casting a clear, aspirational
vision has always served a presidential candidate.

By foreshadowing a potential successful ending to a story, or, as
Stew Friedman at the Wharton School puts it, defining a "compelling


image of an achievable future,"1 leaders captivate the imaginations
of their audiences.

Successful brands, like successful leaders, make it clear what life
will look like if somebody engages their products or services. Nike
promised to bring inspiration and innovation to every athlete.
Likewise, Starbucks offered to inspire and nurture their customers,
one cup at a time. For years, Men's Wearhouse promised, "You're
gonna like the way you look," and they even guaranteed it.
Without a vision, the people perish. And so do brands.
In the final and most important element of the StoryBrand
framework, we're going to offer our customers what they want
most: a happy ending to their story.

THE VISION SHOULD BE SPECIFIC AND CLEAR

One of the problems we run into with StoryBrand clients is the vision
they paint for their customer's future is too fuzzy. Nobody gets
excited about a muddled vision. Stories aren't vague, they're
defined; they're about specific things happening to specific people.
Otherwise they're not stories; they're just the telling of random
events.

Harrison Ford had to defeat the terrorists in Air Force One to
return to a peaceful White House. Erin Brockovich had to win the
final verdict against Pacific Gas and Electric so the citizens of Hinkley,
California, could be rightly compensated for their pain. In a good
story, the resolution must be clearly defined so the audience knows
exactly what to hope for.

Being specific matters. President Kennedy would have bored the
world had he cast a vision for a "highly competitive and productive
space program." Instead, he defined the ambition specifically and
visually and as such inspired a nation: "We're going to put a man on
the moon."


BEFORE AND AFTER

My friend Ryan Deiss at DigitalMarketer created a great tool to help
us imagine the success our customers will experience if they use our
products and services.

In a simple grid, Ryan allows us to see how our customers' lives
will look after they engage us, how they will feel, what their average
day will look like, and what kind of new status they will enjoy.

Filling out this grid for your brand will clarify the vision you have
for your customers. Once you know how your customers' lives will
change after they engage your brand, you will have plenty of
effective copy to use in your marketing collateral.

BEFORE YOUR
BRAND

AFTER YOUR
BRAND

What do they
have?

What are they
feeling?

What's an
average day like?

What is their
status?











The next step is to say it clearly. We must tell our customers
what their lives will look like after they buy our products, or they will
have no motivation to do so. We have to talk about the end vision
we have for their lives in our keynotes, in our email blasts, on our
websites, and everywhere else.

Images are also important when it comes to casting a vision for
our customers. If you're selling kitchen flooring, your website might
show a happy mom picking up her child from the beautiful and
sparkling kitchen floor. If you're selling education, show us students
in the classroom having a great time learning in the environment
you provide. Regardless of what you sell, if possible, show us people
happily engaging with your product.

HOW THE STORY ENDS MATTERS

Ultimately, the success module of your StoryBrand BrandScript
should solve all three levels of your customers' problems: external,
internal, and philosophical. As you contemplate the vision you will
cast for the story you're inviting customers into, consider what their
life will look like when they solve the physical problem, then think
about how that resolution will make them feel, then consider why
the resolution to their problem has made the world a more just place
for them. When we resolve our customers' external, internal, and
philosophical problems, we've
truly envisioned an appealing
resolution to their story and have increased the chances they will
step into that story.

To make a story satisfying to an audience, storytellers often work
hard to resolve all three levels of the hero's conflict in what's called
an obligatory (or climactic) scene. If written well, the scene happens
just before the end of the movie, usually about nine minutes before
the credit rolls. It's referred to as the obligatory scene because the
storyteller is "obligated" to make it happen. If, for instance, a man
meets a woman and falls in love in act 1, the storyteller is obligated


to bring them together at the end (that is, if the storyteller is trying
to make us feel good). The key to a stellar ending, though, is to
successfully open the external, internal, and philosophical story loops
early in the story and then close them all through a single event at
the end.

Here's an example: At the end of George Lucas's film Star Wars:
A New Hope, Luke Skywalker resolves the external conflict (he must
destroy the Death Star by shooting a proton torpedo through the
exhaust valve of the Death Star), his internal conflict (the persistent
doubt that he has what it takes to be a Jedi), and the philosophical
conflict (good versus evil as depicted by himself being pursued by
the violent Darth Vader) in a single shot. When Luke lands the shot
(spoiler alert), all three levels of conflict are resolved at once, giving
the audience three levels of satisfaction and causing me, at the age
of nine, to stand on my seat and throw popcorn into the air, much to
my mother and sister's embarrassment.

Consider the end of David Seidler and Tom Hooper's Oscarwinning movie The King's Speech. The end of that movie utilizes the
same narrative device as Lucas's Star Wars, and to the same stellar
result. If King George VI is going to inspire the British people to stay
in the fight and win the war against Hitler, the king must deliver a
speech without a stutter (external problem), a task that has forced
him to face his own struggling self-confidence (internal conflict). The
stakes are high. Should he fail, Hitler's Nazis will conquer all of
Europe on their way to world domination (good versus evil). Much to
the audience's pleasure, of course, he delivers the speech perfectly
and thus resolves all three levels of conflict in a single event of
narrative harmony. Cue the Oscar music.

The strategy for your brand, then, is to spend your marketing
copy opening external, internal, and philosophical story loops and
then offer to resolve them through the use of your product. For
example, here's a bit of sample copy for a fictional toothpaste
company:


You want a bright smile but are concerned about the harmful
effects of fluoride in most toothpastes. You know you
shouldn't have to compromise your health just to brush your
teeth, so you've been looking for a better alternative. When
you brush your teeth with Gel Fresh, though, you get clean
teeth without the harmful effects and will feel better about
how you're taking care of your teeth and yourself. You
shouldn't have to compromise your health just to have a great
smile.

Let's break down this climactic scene as it relates to brand

messaging:

External: I need to clean my teeth.
Internal: I feel bad about what fluoride might be doing to my

health.

Philosophical: I shouldn't have to use a toothpaste that is bad

for my body.

If we have successfully opened up the three levels of story loops
in our messaging, then writing an ending to our customers' story is
simple: when you brush your teeth with Gel Fresh, you get clean
teeth without the harmful effects (external) and will feel better about
how you're taking care of your teeth (internal) because you
shouldn't have to compromise your overall health just to have a
great smile (philosophical).

HERE ARE MORE WAYS TO STICK THE LANDING

If you want to take the idea of sticking the landing a little further, it's
worth exploring how stories are resolved by narrative experts. After
a good storyteller closes the three open story loops in a single


scene, the hero steps into a new reality framed by an external or
internal resolution (or both) that represents a new world.

The three dominant ways storytellers paint this new world are by

providing the hero with

1. greater power or position,
2. unity with somebody or something that represents their

wholeness, and

3. an experience of self-realization that also makes them

whole.

What's important for us as we clarify our brand message is this:
the fact that these are the three most-employed resolutions in
popular stories implies these are three dominant psychological
desires shared by most human beings.

If our brand can promise a resolution that associates with one of

these driving desires, our BrandScript will be even more enticing.

This is important, so let's explore these three primal desires more

closely:

1. Winning Power and Position (The Need for Status)

When I was in high school, a film came out called Can't Buy Me
Love in which a likable loser named Ronald Miller falls in love with a
popular cheerleader named Cindy Mancini. Unfortunately for me, in
the script, Ronald's character was so overlooked in his school that
most of the other characters in the movie accidentally called him
Donald. You can imagine the teasing I received.

But we loved the movie all the same. Why? Because in the end,
of course, Ronald gets the girl. But he gets more than the girl. He
gains status. After winning Cindy's heart, he becomes one of the
popular kids, or, more accurately, he realizes trying to be somebody
else is a waste of time, which, of course, makes him more popular.

Regardless, it's a universal human desire to want status, which is
evidenced by the number of "coming of age" stories in which a
character realizes they've got w