efine something the customer
wants and must become known for delivering that thing and
delivering it well. As soon as we define something our customer
wants, we posit a series of story questions in the mind of the
customer: Can this brand really help me get what I want? If so, how
much does it cost, where do I get it, and how soon can they ship it
to me? And what do they need to do to answer those questions?
They need to buy our product.


Recently a high-end resort hired us to help them clarify their
message. Like many companies, they were experiencing an identity
crisis. Their marketing collateral featured images of their restaurant,
front desk, and staff. It all looked nice, but unless they were trying
to sell their buildings and their desk and their team, they weren't
exactly inviting customers into a story.

What their customers wanted most, actually, was a luxurious,
restful experience. After StoryBranding their resort, they changed
the text on their website from long stories about themselves (which
positioned them as the hero rather than the customer) to images of
a warm bath, plush towels and robes, someone getting a massage in
the spa, and a looping clip of a back porch rocking chair against the
backdrop of trees blowing in the wind along a golf course.

They replaced the text on their main page with short and
powerful copy: "Find the luxury and rest you've been looking for."
That became the controlling idea that defined the culture for the
entire staff too. This phrase was posted on their office walls, and to
this day you can stop any team member, from the sous chef to the
groundskeeper, and they will tell you their customers are looking for
two things: luxury and rest. Defining exactly what their customer
wanted brought clarity and camaraderie to the team because they
understood their mission. Each member of the staff then understood
his or her role in the story they were inviting their customers to
engage in.

One university we worked with defined their customer's desire as
"a hassle-free MBA you can complete after work." That may sound
overly simple, but don't be fooled. Your brand will grow when people
can easily remember what you offer, and people don't remember
complexity. A landscaping company humorously defined their
customers' ambition as "a yard that looks better than your
neighbor's." A caterer we worked with in Los Angeles defined his
customers' desire as "a mobile fine-dining experience in the
environment of your choice."

When we

identify something our customer wants and
communicate it simply, the story we are inviting them into is given
definition and direction.


Here are some more examples from companies we've worked

with:

Financial Adviser: "A Plan for Your Retirement"
College Alumni Association: "Leave a Meaningful Legacy"
Fine-Dining Restaurant: "A Meal Everybody Will Remember"
Real Estate Agent: "The Home You've Dreamed About"
Bookstore: "A Story to Get Lost In"
Breakfast Bars: "A Healthy Start to Your Day"

When you define something your customers want, they are
invited to direct their story in your direction. And if they see your
brand as a trustworthy and reliable guide and believe you can deliver
on your promise, they are likely to engage.

OPEN A STORY GAP

Identifying a potential desire your customer can fulfill opens what, in
storyteller terms, is called a story gap. The idea is you place a gap
between your hero and what they want. Moviegoers pay attention
when there's a story gap because they wonder if and how the gap is
going to be closed.

Jason Bourne is a spy who has amnesia, and we wonder if he'll
ever discover his true identity. He then finds out who he really is,
which closes the gap, only for another gap to open when he wants
to escape the agency that is trying to kill him. While that story gap is
open, another story gap opens when he meets a young woman
named Marie (enter love story subplot), and as they get together,
that gap closes, only for yet another to open. Bourne and Marie have
to flee the country. When they escape, that gap closes as yet
another one opens. The cycle goes on and on, maintaining a taut
grip on the audience's attention up until the finale.


Here's a storytelling rule that you can immediately apply to your
business: attention rises and lowers with the opening and closing of
a story gap.

For instance, recently I spoke to an audience of gift retailers.
Because Mother's Day was coming up, I advised the audience to
open and close a story gap to drive sales. First, I told them to place
a sign on the sidewalk outside the store that said, "Looking for
something Mom will love for Mother's Day? We've got 20 ideas under
$100." Then, in the store itself, I instructed them to place
respectively numbered cards on twenty items around the store with
the language: "#17 Mom Is Going to Love This." The result? The
stores reported significant increase in sales on all the numbered
items. Why? Because the sign on the sidewalk opened a story gap
and the numbered cards inside the store offered to close that gap.
This simple strategy could be repeated for Valentine's Day,
Christmas, Father's Day, the Fourth of July, Easter, anniversaries, and
on and on and on. In fact, a simple-to-produce promotion like this
could be orchestrated nearly every month.

To understand the power of a story gap is to understand what
compels a human brain toward a desire. And it's not just cinematic
or literary stories. Even classical music follows the formula of the
opening and closing of story gaps. Many classical sonatas can be
sections: exposition, development, and
broken
recapitulation. The final section, recapitulation, is simply an altered
version of the exposition that brings a sense of resolve. If that
doesn't make sense, try singing "Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star"
without singing the final note on the word are. It will bother you to
no end.

three

into

We also see this at work in poetry. When our ears hear Lord
Byron's first line "She walks in beauty, like the night," a story gap has
been opened. We are waiting to hear a word that rhymes with night
and closes the open gap in our minds. Once we hear "Of cloudless
climes and starry skies," our minds find a bit of resolution. Until the
next line, that is.

Even a good dad joke follows the opening and closing of a story
gap. Opening the gap: A man accidentally ran over his neighbor's cat


and agonizingly apologized, saying he would certainly replace the cat
if the neighbor wished. Closing the gap: The neighbor replied: "I'm
not so sure about that. How good are you at catching mice?"

It is my view that story gaps explain a lot more than how and
why we pay attention. They also explain all of human behavior. The
opening of a story gap works a magnetic force that drives every
action we take and certainly every dollar we spend. Hunger is the
opening of a story gap, and lunch is how we close that gap. A
headache is the opening of a story gap, and aspirin is what we take
to make it go away. Arousal is the opening of a story gap, ambition

and sexual fulfillment brings its closing. There is little action in
life that can't be explained by the opening and closing of various
story gaps.

The business lesson here is that when we fail to define
something our customer wants, we fail to open a story gap in their
mind. When we fail to open a story gap in our customer's mind, we
give them no motivation to engage our brand because they are not
left with a story question that demands resolution. Defining
something our customer wants and featuring it in our messaging
and marketing will open a story gap that drives engagement and
action.

PARE DOWN THE CUSTOMER'S AMBITION TO A
SINGLE FOCUS

A critical mistake many organizations make in defining something
their customers want is not paring down that desire to a single
focus. I've had countless conversations with frustrated business
leaders who push back at this point and say, "Wait, we provide
about twenty-seven things our customers want, and we talk about
all of them, but sales remain flat."

My answer to them is this: You're off to a good start, but listing
too many benefits often backfires. Human beings cannot hold large


amounts of new information in their heads at once. If you want to
grow your brand (or write a good screenplay), define a single desire
you are able to fulfill and then add to that desire in subsequent
marketing and messaging. The objective is this: Define a specific
desire your customers have and become known for helping people
achieve that specific desire. If you try to open too many story gaps
at once, your audience will become confused about what, exactly,
you offer.

Paring down your offering can be frustrating if your products and
services fulfill many desires. The reality of a diverse brand, though,
brings the same challenge many amateur screenwriters succumb to:
they clutter the story by diluting their hero's desire with too many
ambitions. If Jason Bourne wants to know who he is and also lose
thirty pounds and marry his high school sweetheart and finish a
marathon and perhaps adopt a cat, we've ruined the story because
the audience will have to burn too many mental calories trying to
figure out what this story is about.

As you create a BrandScript for your overall brand, focus on one
simple desire your customer has and then, as you create campaigns
for each division and maybe even each product, you can identify
more things your customer wants in the subplots of your overall
StoryBrand.

In the following grid, you'll get a picture of what a diverse brand

might look like using the tool of various StoryBrand BrandScripts.


At the highest level, the most important challenge for business
leaders is to define something simple and relevant their customers
want and to become known for delivering on the promise.
Everything else is a subplot that, after having delivered on the
customer's basic desire, will only serve to delight and surprise them
all the more.


CHOOSE A DESIRE RELEVANT TO THE CUSTOMER'S
SURVIVAL

Once a brand defines what their customer wants, they are often
guilty of making the second mistake: what they've defined isn't
related to the customer's survival. In their desire to cast a wide net,
brands define a blob of a desire that is so vague, potential
customers can't figure out why they need it in the first place.

A leadership expert recently asked for feedback on his brand. As
I reviewed his marketing material, I noticed he was making a critical
mistake: he was vague when defining what his customer wanted.

The idea behind his brand is that he imparts knowledge to
potential leaders. He saw himself as a storehouse of leadership
resources and wanted to be the go-to guy for achieving excellence.
In fact, his tagline was "Inhale Knowledge, Exhale Success."

Seems clear enough, but is it? What does exhaling success even
mean? He was making potential customers burn too many mental
calories to figure out how he was going to help them survive and
thrive.

I recommended he make an edit to his message. Instead of
saying, "Inhale Knowledge, Exhale Success," simply say, "Helping
You Become Everyone's Favorite Leader."

Becoming everyone's favorite leader means the customer would
be more respected and better connected to a tribe, they'd have
greater social and career opportunities, and much more. Exhaling
success sounded nice, but thriving as the leader of a tribe is directly
connected to survival. People will always choose a story that helps
them survive and thrive.

Fortunately, he liked the idea, mostly because that's what he was
already doing. Defining something the customer wants (to be a
respected leader) and connecting it with the customer's desire for
survival (respect within a tribe) opened an enticing story gap for
potential clients and, of course, coaching inquiries went up.


What Does Survival Mean?

When I say survival, I'm talking about that primitive desire we all
have to be safe, healthy, happy, and strong. Survival simply means
we have the physical, economic, and social resources to eat, drink,
reproduce, and fend off foes.

So what kinds of desires fit under this definition? Well, too many

to count, but consider these examples:

Conserving financial resources. In order to survive and

thrive, your customers may need to conserve resources. In
simple terms, this means they may need to save money. If
your brand can help them save money, you've tapped into a
survival mechanism. Walmart has built their brand on the
promise of everyday low prices. Their tagline "Save Money.
Live Better" further communicates savings and value and thus
taps into a basic function of survival, the conservation of
resources. Does it work? Even with terrifyingly low profit
margins, Walmart remains one of the largest companies in
the world.

Conserving time. In developed countries, most of our

customers have thankfully moved beyond the hunter-gatherer
stage of survival. They are familiar, then, with the notion of
opportunity costs. Can your housecleaning service give your
customers more time to work on other things or more time to
spend with family? Then they might be interested. Michael
Hyatt's Full Focus Planner, one of the most successful day
planning systems of all time, has earned the respect of
millions by offering users the invaluable gift of time.

Building social networks. If our brand can help people find

community, we've tapped into yet another survival
mechanism. We think we're only being nice when we bring
our coworkers coffee, but what if we're actually being nice
because our primitive brains want to make connections in an
effort to build a tribe in case the bad guys come knocking at
the door? Add this to the fact human beings have a strong


desire to nurture and be nurtured, and we've tapped into yet
another survival mechanism. The Coach Builder Community
has flourished by offering coaches the chance to build
community with each other, sharing best practices and
encouragement. So has every church, every sports league,
every Alcoholics Anonymous chapter, every Girl Scout troop,
and countless other examples of organizations and institutions
that lead with the offer of community.

Gaining status. Luxury brands like Mercedes and Rolex don't

make much practical sense in terms of survival, right? In fact,
spending lots of money buying a luxury car when a more
common brand would do the trick seems counter to our
survival, doesn't it? Not when you consider the importance of
status. Gaining status, in any tribe, is a survival strategy.
Status projects a sense of abundance that may attract
powerful allies, repel potential foes (just as a lion by using a
loud roar), and, if we're into shallow companions, even help
us secure a mate. Rolex, Mercedes, Louis Vuitton, and other
luxury brands are truly selling more than just cars and
watches; they're selling an identity associated with power,
prestige, refinement, and, yes, survival.

Accumulating resources. If the products and services you
offer help people make money or accumulate much-needed
resources, that will quickly translate into a person's desire for
survival. With more money, our customers will have more
opportunity to secure many of the other survival resources
they may need. Many StoryBrand clients run business-tobusiness offerings (StoryBrand itself is a business-to-business
company), so offering increased productivity, increased
revenue, or decreased waste are powerful associations with
the need for a business (or an individual) to survive and
thrive. Every financial adviser on the planet sells the
accumulation of resources (that is, if they are smart).

Showing generosity. None of the desires I've listed are evil.

They can all be taken too far, but the reality is we are
designed to survive. Still, we should be comforted by the fact


that nearly all human beings have an enormous potential for
generosity. Achieving an aspirational identity of being
sacrificial actually helps us survive (fends off foes, decreases
outside criticism, helps earn trust in our tribe, and so on), but
it also taps into something truly redemptive: we want other
people to survive too. Most people are not nearly as
Darwinian in their thinking as we've been led to believe. We
are empathetic and caring creatures who will gladly sacrifice
for the well-being of others, often in anonymity. The truth is
we aren't only interested in our own survival; we're interested
in the survival of others. Especially those who have not been
given the opportunities we enjoy. Another consideration,
especially for those in the nonprofit space, is that by being
generous, our donors are actually increasing their own chance
of survival. Why does the NFL constantly associate with soft
and tender charitable efforts? Because, while certainly being a
generous brand, they are smart: they're softening the image
of a violent sport, thus executing on a strategy that helps the
brand itself survive.

Desiring meaning. Viktor Frankl was right when he contended
with Sigmund Freud, insinuating that the chief desire of man
is not pleasure but meaning. In fact, in his book Man's Search
for Meaning, Frankl argued convincingly that man was
actually most tempted to distract himself with pleasure when
his life was void of meaning.1 So how do we offer potential
customers a sense of meaning? Not unlike giving our
customers the opportunity to be generous, we invite them to
participate in something greater than themselves. A
movement. A cause to champion. A valiant fight against a real
villain, be that villain flesh and blood or a harmful philosophy.
The clothing brand Patagonia has made a name for itself
through its altruistic business model, turning down millions in
profit in their commitment to sustainable corporate practices.
Their effort is a grand example of meaning over money, which
(rightly so) has rewarded them in financial strength through a


devoted customer base who also wants their clothes to be
something more than just warm and fashionable.

WHAT'S THE STORY QUESTION YOU ARE POSING
TO YOUR CUSTOMER?

When I offered my executive coach friend the tagline "Helping You
Become Everyone's Favorite Leader," his customers' brains were able
to translate that message into multiple survival categories, including
a social network, status, the innate desire to be generous, the
opportunity to gain resources, and even the desire for deeper
meaning.

In business, if we don't communicate clearly, we shrink. When
we're motivating a team, convincing shareholders to stay engaged,
or selling to customers, we must define a desire our customers have
or we will fail to open a story gap and the audience we desire will
ignore us. Remember, customers want to envision the great place
you are going to take them. Unless you identify something they
want, it's doubtful they will follow you.

Imagine your customer is a hitchhiker. You pull over to give him a
ride, and the one burning question on his mind is simply this: Where
are you going? But as he approaches, you roll down the window and
start talking about your mission statement, or how your grandfather
built this car with his bare hands, or how your road trip playlist is all
1980s alternative. This person doesn't care. All he wanted was to
get to San Francisco with a flower in his hair.

The goal for our branding should be that every potential
customer knows exactly where we will take them: to visit a luxury
resort where they can get some rest, to become the leader
everybody loves, or to save money and live better. One of my
favorite clothing brands, Filson, makes high-quality clothes and gear
for what I think of as the upscale outdoors. They've been in business
for over a hundred years, and just wearing their shirts and pants


makes me feel like I've stepped back in time to when things were
just made better. When I think about a brand that makes me feel
that way, however, I wonder how those thoughts got in my head in
the first place. To be sure, their clothing looks and feels great, but
there are many brands that compete on quality. Where did I get the
idea that they were the best? It turns out they told me. It's right
there on the Filson tag, right next to the size of the shirt. "Might as
well have the best" is printed on most of their items. Smart. Don't
assume your customers know what you are offering. Tell them. And
tell them in plain, simple, and repeatable language. The only way
word will get out about your brand is if you give people the exact
words to use.

If you randomly asked a potential customer where your brand
wants to take them, would they be able to answer? Would they be
able to repeat back to you exactly what your brand offers? If not,
your brand is suffering the cost of confusion. You can fix this. Define
a desire your customer base has and start talking about it. When
you do, the story you are inviting customers into will have a new and
powerful hook.

CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERS LISTEN

Go to StoryBrand.AI and either create a StoryBrand BrandScript
or log in to your existing BrandScript.
Either alone or with a team, brainstorm what potential desires
your customers might have that you can fulfill.
Make a decision. Choose something your customer wants and fill
in the "character" module of your StoryBrand BrandScript.
Read the next chapter and repeat this process for the next
section of your BrandScript.


Once you fill out the first module of your StoryBrand BrandScript,
you'll be on your way to inviting customers into an incredible story. At
this point, they're interested in you and what you offer. But what can
we do to entice them even further into a story? Let's move on to the
next StoryBrand element and find out!

You will be tempted to fill out the rest of your StoryBrand BrandScript
now, but I encourage you to read the chapter associated with each
StoryBrand element to be sure you're filling it out correctly. Once you've
completed your first BrandScript, section 3 of this book will help you
create simple, effective marketing and messaging tools.



CHAPTER 5

HAS A PROBLEM

StoryBrand Principle Two: Companies tend to
sell solutions to external problems, but
customers buy solutions to internal problems.

Now that you've piqued your potential customers' curiosity about
your brand, how do you deepen their interest so that they are more
likely to place an order? You borrow yet another play from the
storyteller's playbook; you start talking about the problems your
customers are living with because they don't have your product yet.

Identifying our customers' problems deepens their interest in the
story we are inviting them into because when we identify their
problem, we open the story gap even wider.

In a story, the problem is the "hook," and if we don't identify our
customers' problems, the story we are inviting them into will fizzle
fast. Until our hero has a problem, the story fails to gain traction,
and as soon as the conflict in a story is resolved, audiences stop
paying attention. The next time you watch a movie, pause the
screen at any point and I promise you will be able to identify a
problem the hero is dealing with. Even if you are watching a
documentary, the same principle applies. Documentary filmmakers
must identify a problem in each section because if they don't, the
documentary will fail.

In fact, there's a parlor trick I often play in my home when I'm
making this point. Our carriage house doubles as a library and
contains over a thousand books. When I talk about how every story
is about problems being solved, I ask somebody to go to the shelf


and pull out any book. When they do, I ask them to open the book
to any page, then I ask them to set their finger down on any
paragraph. Once this is done I let them know what that paragraph is
about. It's about conflict. It's about a problem. It's about a hero who
is up against trouble and is fighting their way out. And you know
what? I've never been wrong. Why is nearly every sentence in every
novel about conflict? Because a good writer knows that conflict is
how you get people's attention. This is also why every politician
wants their constituents to believe the country is going to hell in a
hand basket. If it weren't, why would anybody need them? The
same is true of the news. When is the last time you turned on the
news to discover everything was going great? No news program will
ever admit things are okay, because if they did, you'd go outside and
fly a kite with your kids and they'd be out of a job.

Certainly there are constant problems happening in the world,
but are they nearly as bad as the media would have us believe? Not
at all. As the novelist James Scott Bell says, "Readers want to fret."1
As careful as we must be to refrain from manipulating people
with half-truths and exaggerations, those of us who build brands can
learn a thing or two from professionals in the entertainment industry
(and I'd include twenty-four-hour news outlets as producers of
entertainment). Conflict gets people's attention.

If Jason Bourne were to receive a call thirty minutes into Bourne
Identity and on the other end of the call a gentle voice explained
who Jason really was, why he'd suffered amnesia, and that the
government was sorry for the offense and offering a pension along
with a house on the coast, the moviegoing audience would lose
interest because the reason to pay attention would be gone. If there
is no conflict in the story, there is no story gap, and without a story
gap, there is no reason to pay attention.

It bears repeating: the more we talk about the problems our
customers experience, the more curiosity they will have about our
brand.

So how do we put this idea to work in our messaging? It's
simple. Figure out what problem your products solve. Are you a


clothing boutique? Talk about how hard it is to find something to
wear that goes with anything. Talk about how important it is to
stand out in the office. Talk about how frustrating it is to find clothes
that are well-made. When you talk about a problem, people become
interested in finding a solution, which means you sell more of your
products.

Last year I spent time with a powerful government agency to
help them clarify messaging on foreign policy. I can't name the
agency because of a nondisclosure agreement, but I can share the
messaging points as they were always intended to be public facing
from the beginning. In fact, it is hoped the talking points will be
repeated by many, so I'm happy to do my part. As we spent the day
together, filling whiteboards and keynote decks with talking point
after talking point, I realized the nature of the threat against
America, and I found the significant "problems" we were up against
to be concerning, to say the least. The threat the agency wanted the
public to understand was this: A global force is taking shape to
empower authoritarian regimes. As I sat there looking at the
whiteboard, I realized the threat my family faced, especially my
young daughter, was significant. I confess that until it had been
spelled out so clearly, I'd not paid much attention. With the help of
the folks in that room, I realized there are significant forces
threatening our democracy, our economy, and our culture. In short,
the very idea of democracy is a threat to the personal power of
some of the world's most authoritarian leaders. Specifically, if
citizens under authoritarian regimes witness the peaceful transfer of
power in America, along with economic and cultural freedom and
flourishing, their people will want it too, which threatens the
stranglehold the autocratic leader must maintain over their own
people. Because of this, democracies must be diminished or
destroyed on the world stage. Trillions of dollars, books filled with
lies, rooms filled with hackers, and ships and planes loaded with
weapons are all being utilized against America and all other
successful democracies. Our job in that room was to find the right
words to adequately warn a distracted American public, and it was
certainly working on me.


HOW TO TALK ABOUT YOUR CUSTOMERS'
PROBLEMS

In the second module of the StoryBrand framework, we're going to
look at three elements of conflict that will increase customer
interest, ratchet up engagement, and give a greater depth of
meaning to the story our brand is inviting customers into.

First, though, let's start with the root of where all this conflict is
coming from. I'm talking about one of the most dynamic, interesting
characters in any story: the villain.

The Villain Gives the Problem a Root Cause and a Focus

The villain is the number one device storytellers use to give

conflict a clear point of focus.

Screenwriters and novelists know the stronger, more evil, more
dastardly the villain, the more sympathy we will have for the hero
and the more the audience will want them to defeat their foe and
return to their previous state of stability.

How much less sympathetic would Batman be if it weren't for the
diabolical Joker? Would we root as strongly for Luke Skywalker if it
weren't for the haunting presence of Darth Vader? Doesn't Harry
Potter become infinitely more heroic under the threat of Voldemort?
What about superman without the threat of Kryptonite? (Let's be
honest, Lex Luthor isn't that interesting of a bad guy.)

Here's why this matters in the building of your brand: If we want
our customers' ears to perk up when we talk about our products and
services, we should position these as weapons they can use to
defeat a villain. The more dastardly the villains, the more urgent
their need for our products.

If we're selling time-management software, for instance, we
might talk about time thieves, those people who want to steal our
time by locking us in meetings in which nothing gets done, or
coworkers who stand around the coffee machine waiting for the next
victim they can capture for a long conversation about their latest


Netflix find. That's a good villain. Now that we've identified the
villain, we can talk about the conflict they stir up, that conflict being
distractions. Our time-management software could then be offered
as a weapon that stops time thieves in their tracks. After all, we
have to get back to our "blocked for deep work" session. Time
thieves could be personified as snipers in the woods, taking shots at
us when we least expect it. When you use our new timemanagement system, however, you learn to say no to unimportant
meetings and get-togethers, which keeps you out of the woods in
the first place. Sounds kind of dramatic, right? Yet distractions are
what's diluting our customers' potential, wrecking their families,
stealing their sanity, and costing them enormous amounts of time
and money. Time thieves, then, are a great personification of the
villains and distractions our product helps people avoid. Don't be
afraid of a little drama in your messaging, especially if that drama is
true.

The point is, real threats exist in the world. If your customer
wasn't experiencing some sort of pain or frustration as it relates to
your brand, they wouldn't be seeking you out anyway. Take your
customers' frustrations seriously. Whether we are talking about
artery-blocking cholesterol, money-eating
inflation, or sleepdisrupting anxiety, we are naive to assume our customers' quality of
life isn't under threat. And if our product can protect our customers,
we can and should name the villains out to get them.

Now that I've pointed out the technique of identifying villains in
our customers' challenges, you'll see the messaging methodology
being used in television commercials all the time. Who knew that
those dust bunnies collecting along the baseboards of our houses
move around in animated, criminal gangs wearing leather jackets,
coordinating their devilish efforts to ruin our floors? Ah, that is, until
they meet their match: the new mop from ACME Mop Company.

Advertisers personify the villains their customers face in order to
capture their customers' imaginations and give their frustrations a
focal point. Fuzzy hairballs with squeaky voices living in your drains,
making nests, and clogging up the pipes? Yellow globs of living,


breathing, talking plaque vacationing between your teeth? These are
all personified versions of conflict. They're all villains.

Here are four characteristics that make for a good villain on your

StoryBrand BrandScript:

1. The villain should be a root source. High taxes, for
example, are not an example of a villain; they are what a
villain makes us experience. Rather, the broken-down
government is a good example of a villain that is charging us
all that tax money to do precisely nothing but use it to collect
salaries and stir up culture wars so they can get re-elected
and continue their important work of doing nothing.

2. The villain should be relatable. When people hear us talk
about the villain, they should immediately recognize it as
something they disdain.

3. The villain should be singular. One villain is enough. A

story with too many villains falls apart for lack of clarity.

4. The villain should be real. Never go down the path of
being a fear-monger. There are plenty of actual villains out
there to fight. Let's go after them on behalf of our customers.
5. Another thing: the villain doesn't have to be serious. If
you're creating the messaging for the upcoming Boston Red
Sox versus New York Yankees series, personifying your
opponent as the villain is just smart marketing. Turning the
opposition into a villain will fill the stands at either stadium
and increase the urgency the audience feels while rooting for
their team.

Is there a villain in your customers' story? Of course there is.
What is the chief source of conflict that your products and services
defeat? Talk about this villain. The more you do, the more people
will want a tool to help them escape the villain's deadly grasp.

Later, when you're creating your BrandScript, I'll ask you to
brainstorm what kind of villain your customer faces. For now,
though, let's look closely at the kinds of conflict this villain causes.
Once we understand the three levels of problems our customers


encounter, we'll have a better idea of how to talk about their
problems in such a way that they engage.

The Three Levels of Conflict

A villain is the antagonist because they cause the hero serious
problems. That's obvious. But what's less obvious is that in a story,
there are three levels of problems that work together to increase the
urgency and draw the moviegoing audience further and further in.
The three levels of problems heroes (and customers) face are

external problems,
internal problems, and
philosophical problems

In a story, a villain initiates an external problem that causes the
character to experience an internal frustration that is, quite simply,
philosophically wrong. These are also the three levels of problems a
customer hopes to solve when they buy a product.

I know that sounds complicated, but let's take a closer look at
each level of conflict so we know exactly how to talk about each
frustration so that it is as intriguing as it can be.

EXTERNAL PROBLEMS
In literature, a villain's job is to wreak havoc on the hero, to place
barriers between them and the stability they desire. But ill intentions
aren't enough. Something, that is, some thing (or things) must
represent this barrier. Enter the external problem.

In stories, the external problem is often a physical, tangible
problem the hero must overcome in order to save the day. The
problem might manifest itself as a ticking time bomb or a runaway
bus, or maybe even a combination of the two: a bomb on a bus that
will go off if Keanu Reeves doesn't keep the speed above fifty miles
per hour!


The external problem works like a football set between the hero
and the villain, and each is trying to gain control of it so they can
win the game.

For Billy Beane in the movie Moneyball, the external problem is
the need to win baseball games. For Matthew Broderick in the movie
WarGames, it's a piece of rogue software that has taken over the
American government's computer system and is waging a deadly
war against the Soviets.

But what does the existence of an external problem in a story
have to do with branding? Well, most of us are in the business of
solving external problems. We provide insurance or clothes or soccer
balls. If we own a restaurant, the external problem we solve is
hunger. The external problem a plumber fixes might be a leaky pipe,
just like a pest-control guy might solve the external problem of
termites in the attic.

Brainstorming what external problems you solve will be the
easiest part of creating your StoryBrand BrandScript. The external
problem is usually obvious. But you'd be wrong to think the reason
people call you, walk through your door, or visit your website is
limited to the resolution of an external problem. Something else is
going on.

INTERNAL PROBLEMS
By limiting our marketing messages to external problems, we neglect
a principle that is costing us thousands and potentially millions of
dollars. That principle is this: companies tend to sell solutions to
external problems, but people buy solutions to internal problems.

The purpose of an external problem in a story is to manifest an
internal problem. If I wrote a movie about a guy who simply needed
to disarm a bomb, audiences would lose interest. What storytellers
and screenwriters do, then, is create a backstory of frustration in the
hero's life.

In the movie Moneyball, for instance, Billy Beane failed in his
playing career and so was filled with self-doubt about whether he
could redeem himself as a general manager. In Star Wars, Luke


Skywalker was told by his uncle that he was too young to join the
Rebellion, so he doubted his ability until the very end.

In almost every story the hero struggles with the same question:
Do I have what it takes? This question can make them feel
frustrated, incompetent, and confused. The sense of self-doubt is
what makes a movie about baseball relatable to a soccer mom and a
romantic comedy relatable to a truck-driving man.

Stories teach us that people's internal desire to resolve a
frustration is a greater motivator than their desire to solve an
external problem.

This is where most brands make a critical mistake. By assuming
our customers only want to resolve external problems, we fail to
engage the deeper frustration they're feeling. The truth is, it's those
frustrations that are motivating them to call you.

The key to discovering your customers' internal problem is to ask
yourself (or preferably, them) what the external problem they are
dealing with is causing them to feel. For instance, if you sell
childcare, the external problem is that the kids need a nanny, but
what is this need causing your potential customers to feel? Helpless?
Hopeless? Tired? Overwhelmed? These are the internal problems
your customers are experiencing, and the more you talk about them,
the more people want to buy your product so they can resolve those
frustrations. When we ask, "What does this problem make our
customers feel?" we can easily brainstorm great copy that will
improve our marketing efforts.

After their near collapse, Apple didn't find their footing until
Steve Jobs understood that people felt intimidated (internal
problem) by computers and wanted a friendlier interface with
technology. In one of the most powerful advertising campaigns in
history, Apple showed a simple, hip, fun character who just wanted
to take photos and listen to music and write books next to a not-sohip tech nerd who wanted to talk about the inner workings of his
operating system. The campaign positioned Apple Computers as the
company to go to if you wanted to enjoy life and express yourself
but felt marginalized by all the tech talk. In this specific campaign,
Apple started selling more than computers; they sold a resolution to


their
the problem of customer
customers' internal problem is one of the reasons Apple experienced
rapid growth and created passionate brand evangelists.

intimidation. Understanding

The only reason our customers buy from us is because their
external problem is frustrating them in some way. If we can identify
that frustration, put it into words, and offer to resolve it along with
the original external problem, we do more than just sell our
customers products; we bond with our customers because we've
positioned ourselves deeply into their narrative.

For example, if we own a house-painting business, our
customer's external problem might be an unsightly home. The
internal problem, however, may involve a sense of embarrassment
about having the ugliest house on the block. Knowing this, our
marketing could offer "Paint That Will Make Your Neighbors Jealous."
One of our clients, Stephen Boice, recently incorporated more
internal messaging on his website and saw an increase in business,
just by changing a few words. Stephen and his wife own Vitality
Aesthetics, a face and skin studio in Florida that offers over thirty
different treatments to help their customers look better. The header
at the top of their website previously read, "Your Natural Beauty"
and featured a picture of an attractive woman being treated by an
aesthetician. While the website looked great and business was
strong, I asked David to try something slightly different: Add get and
back to their header. In other words, instead of saying "Your Natural
Beauty," say "Get Your Natural Beauty Back," knowing that as most
of us get older and spend more time in the sun, we lose our youthful
looks a little faster than we have to. By identifying a customer's
feeling that they have lost something, David would be tapping into
an internal frustration. I also asked David to include a price list that
included all the procedures he offered but to give the price list away
only in exchange for an email address. Once a potential customer
downloaded the price list (definitely a qualified and interested
customer), I asked him to send thirty emails over thirty weeks
documenting how thirty separate clients felt about themselves after
engaging each of his products. By creating an automated email
campaign that taps into his customers' internal frustrations and tells


stories of how other customers had been relieved of those
frustrations, David began to grow his business again. As digital
advertising becomes more expensive and less effective, adding
sound bites to our messaging that speak to our customers' internal
problems becomes more and more important as a way to generate
greater engagement.

What Frustrations Do Our Products Resolve?

Recently, the rental car company National got my business by
understanding my internal frustration. I used to rent cars from a
company that got on my nerves. When I get off a plane, I normally
don't feel like making small talk. The staff at the company I used to
rent cars from had a policy of chitchatting with their customers.
They even used a script. First they asked whether I was in town for
business or pleasure, then they asked about the weather where I
came from. On and on it went. I heard this script so many times I
started having fun beating them to their own talking points. I'd often
jump ahead on their script and ask the clerk, "Are you going to be
able to have a little downtime while you're in town?" They'd just
stare blankly at me because I'd hijacked their line.

One day, though, I was watching television and a commercial
came on for National Car Rental. The commercial showed a guy
walking through the rental office without talking to anybody. The
character talked about how he hated having to make conversation
with salespeople and how he loved walking straight to his car. I
immediately changed rental car companies and have been happy
ever since.

Speaking of car companies, CarMax is a chain of used car
dealerships that aims most of their marketing collateral at the
internal problem a customer experiences when looking for a used
car--namely, the fear and frustration of having to interact with a
used car salesman.

If you've ever walked onto a used car lot, you know the feeling.
It's as though you're about to wear yourself out in an altercation
with a professional wrestler.


Knowing their customers don't want to haggle over prices with a
wannabe con artist, CarMax's business strategy is aimed at
alleviating your fear of being lied to, cheated, or worked over in your
car-buying experience. To do this, they have an agreement plan with
their customers that ensures the price on the car is the price you'll
pay, and lets you know their salespeople aren't compensated on a
variable commission. They also highlight their quality certification
and inspection process that ensures every car they sell is reliable.2

The external problem CarMax resolves is the need for a car, of
course, but they hardly advertise about cars at all. Instead, their
smart marketing department has focused on their customers'
internal problems and, in doing so, entered one of the least-trusted
industries in America and created a $15 billion phenomenon.3

Likewise, Starbucks exploded not just by offering customers a
cup of coffee but by giving them a comfortable, sophisticated
environment in which to relax and connect. When they walked into a
Starbucks, customers felt good about themselves. Americans went
from hanging out in diners and bars to lounging in a local, Italianstyle coffee shop. By solving their customers' internal problems,
Starbucks brought an entire industry to America. Thousands of
European-style boutique coffee shops have popped up in nearly
every small town in America, following Starbucks' lead.

In understanding how their customers wanted to feel, Starbucks
took a product that Americans were used to paying fifty cents for (or
drinking for almost free at home or at work) and were able to
charge four or five dollars per cup. Starbucks customers are willing
to pay more for their coffee because they sense greater value with
each cup.

Understanding and

talking about our customers'

internal
problems does more than create better advertising. Framing our
products as a resolution to both external and internal problems
increases the perceived value (and, I would argue, actual value) of
those products. In other words, when you solve somebody's internal
problem, you can charge more for your products.


Later, I'll guide you through a brainstorming exercise helping you
identify some of your customers' internal problems, but before that,
let's look at a third kind of problem our customers experience. This
third level can help the story you are inviting customers into go from
interesting to downright passion-inducing. Adding a philosophical
problem is one of the main reasons a film will win Best Picture at the
Academy Awards, and it will have your audience sitting on the edge
of their seats. A good philosophical problem can help you turn
disinterested customers into brand fanatics.

PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS
Adding a philosophical problem creates depth and meaning in a
story and is often the reason stories resonate and become fan
favorites. The philosophical problem helps those who engage the
story understand why the story matters in the overall epic narrative
of humanity itself.

Why is it important that Tommy Boy should save his dad's
company? I'll tell you why, because the people trying to take Tommy
Boy down are lying thieves. This is a comedic story about honesty,
family, integrity, and hard work versus deception, greed, and
trickery.

Why is it important that Hamlet should avenge his father's death?

Because his uncle is getting away with murder.

Why is it important that Bridget Jones should find love? Because
the beauty and worth of every person deserves to be recognized and
cherished by another.

A philosophical problem can best be talked about using terms like
ought and shouldn't. For example: "Bad people shouldn't be allowed
to win" and "People ought to be treated fairly."

In the movie The King's Speech, the external problem is
presented in the form of King George's stutter. This external problem
manifests the internal problem of the king's self-doubt and his own
feeling that the wrong man now wears the crown. King George
simply doesn't believe he has what it takes to lead his country.
Philosophically, though, the stakes are much greater. Because the


king must unify his people against the Nazis, the story takes on the
philosophical problem of good versus evil.

What's the Deeper Meaning?

The reason people resonate so strongly with the philosophical
problem in a story is because human beings want to be involved in a
story that is larger than themselves. When a story represents (or
speaks to) a cause, it expands beyond the screen or the page and
stirs people to champion a cause, which gives the story itself
considerably more import. Likewise, brands that give customers a
voice in a larger narrative add value to their products by offering a
deeper sense of meaning in their own story.

After creating their BrandScript, a global consulting firm my team
worked with began to talk about how everybody deserved to work
for a great manager. A pet store owner who came to us hung a sign
in her window that said, "Pets deserve to eat healthy food too." A
fun-loving travel agent came to us and adopted the seasonal line
"Because this summer should be remembered forever."

Before music went digital, Tower Records promoted their stores
by using the tagline "No Music, No Life." Not only did the tagline help
them sell more than a billion dollars in records each year, but they
sold thousands of bumper stickers and T-shirts featuring the tagline
to fans who wanted to associate with the philosophical belief that
music mattered.

Is there a deeper story your brand contributes to? Can your
products be positioned as tools your customers use to fight back
against something that ought not to be? If so, let's include some
philosophical stakes in our messaging.

The Perfect Brand Promise

If we really want to satisfy our customers and create brand
evangelists, we can offer much more than products or services; we
can offer to resolve an external, internal, and philosophical problem
whenever they engage our business.


Storytellers use this formula to endear and satisfy audiences all
the time. The strategy is to resolve the hero's external, internal, and
philosophical problem in a single, well-crafted scene. At the end of
the blockbuster movie Star Wars: A New Hope, when Luke
Skywalker shoots a photon torpedo through the exhaust portal in an
empire-constructed planetary ship called the Death Star, Luke
resolves the external problem of destroying the Death Star, the
internal problem of self-doubt he felt about being a Jedi, and the
philosophical problem of good versus evil. When all three levels of
conflict were resolved at once, the audience felt three levels of relief,
and the movie itself became a phenomenon that generated
countless sequels and spin-offs and an entire new world at Disney's
Hollywood Studios.

The climactic scene is often called the "obligatory" scene because
by opening the external, internal, and philosophical story gap early
in the movie, the storyteller is obligated to close all three levels of
conflict at the story's end. This idea is important for those of us who
are building a brand. Our products, if we want them to succeed in
the marketplace, should offer to solve a problem, soothe a feeling,
and, if possible, contribute to some sort of justice-oriented agenda.
Then, upon purchase, our solutions need to fulfill all three promises.
If we can accomplish this (and use clear words to explain how we
did), we can expect customers to fall in love with our products and
our brand.

If we really want our business to grow, we should position our
products as the resolution to an external, internal, and philosophical
problem and frame the "Buy Now" button as the action a customer
must take to close the story gap we've opened in their minds.

Let's look at how some familiar brands have positioned their
products as the solution to external, internal, and philosophical
problems:

TESLA MOTOR CARS:
Villain: Gas-guzzling, inferior technology
External: I need a better car.


Internal: I want to be an early adopter of new technology.
Philosophical: My choice of car ought to help save the
environment and perform better at the same time.

NESPRESSO HOME COFFEE MACHINES:
Villain: Coffee machines that make bad coffee
External: I want better-tasting coffee at home.
Internal: I want my home coffee machine to make me feel

sophisticated.

Philosophical: I shouldn't have to be a barista to make

gourmet coffee at home.

EDWARD JONES FINANCIAL PLANNING:
Villain: Financial firms that don't listen to their customers
External: I need investment help.
Internal: I'm confused about how to do this (especially with all

the tech-driven resources out there).

Philosophical: If I'm going to invest my money, I deserve an
adviser who will thoughtfully explain financial complexities to
me in person.

WHAT CHALLENGES ARE YOU HELPING YOUR
CUSTOMER OVERCOME?

Identifying a villain that is causing an external, internal, and
philosophical problem may seem daunting, but it will come to you if
you commit to working it out in a brainstorming session. But be
careful to keep it simple. Many of our clients want to include three
villains, seven external problems, four internal problems, and so on.
But, as I've already mentioned, stories are best when they are clear.
If we are going to create memorable sound bites, we'll need to make
choices.

Is there a single villain your brand stands against? What external
problem is that villain causing? How is that external problem making


your customers feel? And why is it unjust for people to have to
suffer at the hands of this villain?

These are the four questions we want to answer in the problem
section of our StoryBrand BrandScript. When we do, the story our
brand is telling will take shape because our hero, the customer who
wants something, is being challenged. Will they win? Will their
problems be resolved?

Perhaps. The thing is, they will have to engage your brand to find

out.

CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERS LISTEN

Go to StoryBrand.AI and either create a BrandScript or log in to
your existing BrandScript.
Either alone or with your team, brainstorm all of the literal and
metaphorical villains your brand takes a stand against.
Brainstorm the external problems your brand resolves. Is there
one that seems to represent the widest swath of products?
Brainstorm the internal problem (frustration or doubt) your
customers are feeling as it relates to your brand. Is there one
that stands out as a universal experience for your customers?
Is your brand part of a larger, more important story? Is there a
philosophical wrong your brand stands against?
Once you finish your brainstorming session, make the four
StoryBrand BrandScript decisions that will allow you to create
sound bites for the second element of your StoryBrand
BrandScript.




CHAPTER 6

AND MEETS A GUIDE

StoryBrand Principle Three: Customers aren't
looking for another hero; they're looking for a
guide.

Shakespeare was right--a person's life is made up of many acts. As
a book writer, though, I prefer to see these acts as chapters. If you
look back on your life, you'll likely see them too. There is the chapter
when you grew up poor and the chapter when you began to
understand you could dream big and the chapter about the
importance of family and relationships and the chapter in which you
realize that giving is more fulfilling than getting and so on and so on.
There is an evolution to our maturity, and when you look back, it's a
beautiful evolution. I believe one of the main miracles of life is the
fact that we get to transform.

No two lives are the same, yet we share common chapters. Every

human being is on a transformational journey.

It's easy to recognize these chapters by their events, or what
writer and story scholar James Scott Bell calls "doorways of no
return."1 This might have been our parents' divorce, our first crush, a
rejection from somebody we loved, or having absolutely nailed the
moonwalk when the crowd gathered around us at the junior high
dance.

In stories, events mark the beginnings and endings of our
chapters. But if we look closer, we will see something else or, more
accurately, somebody else.


The events that define our chapters are often instigated or
interpreted by mystical characters who help us along the way. Story
scholars call these characters by many names, such as wizards or
mentors or helpers. I choose to call these mystical characters guides
--those who step into our lives and help us face our challenges so
that we can overcome them and transform into better versions of
ourselves.

In his book The Seven Basic Plots, Christopher Booker describes

how a guide is introduced into the story this way:

A hero or heroine falls under a dark spell which eventually traps them in
living death: physical or spiritual
some wintry state, akin to a
imprisonment, sleep, sickness or some other form of enchantment. For a
long time they languish in this frozen condition. Then a miraculous act of
redemption takes place, focused on a particular figure who helps to
liberate the hero or heroine from imprisonment. From the depths of
darkness they are brought up into glorious light.2

EVERY HERO IS LOOKING FOR A GUIDE

Our first guides came to us early. I'm talking about our mother and
father, who loved us more than they loved themselves, who
sacrificed for us and taught us the ways of the world. They taught
us language and belonging and connection and our first words and
letters and numbers. They read us stories about characters who
faced troubles but showed courage. Later, many of our teachers and
coaches played the role of guide by helping us understand the
importance of working hard, and they taught us to believe we could
accomplish more than we previously thought possible. For many of
us, guides have included poets we've read, leaders who gave us a
voice in the halls of power, therapists who helped us make sense of
and solve our challenges, and yes, even brands that offered
encouragement and tools that helped us overcome our challenges.


Guides are important in stories because they are important in
life. Every human being knows that the wisdom it takes to navigate
life is passed down, that no human can figure it out on their own. If
a hero solves her own problem in a story, the audience will find it
difficult to suspend disbelief. Why? Because we intuitively know if
she could solve her own problem, she wouldn't have gotten into
trouble in the first place. Storytellers use the guide character, then,
to encourage the hero and equip them to win the day.

You've seen the guide in nearly every story you've read, listened
to, or watched: Frodo is helped by Gandalf, Katniss is guided by
Haymitch, and Luke Skywalker is shown the way of a Jedi by the allknowing Yoda. Hamlet was guided by his father's ghost, just as
Romeo was taught the ways of love by Juliet.

Human beings wake up every morning self-identifying as the
hero of their own story. They are troubled by external, internal, and
philosophical conflicts, and they know they can't solve these
problems on their own. For this reason, all human beings are
seeking guides. Certainly we are inspired by stories of other heroes
overcoming great challenges, but what we really need when the
conflict is rising in our own lives is not another hero--what we need
is a guide.

The fatal mistake many brands make, especially young brands
who believe they have something to prove, is positioning themselves
as the hero in the story rather than the guide. As I've already
mentioned, a brand that positions itself as the hero is destined to
lose.

The Fatal Mistake

The ramifications of positioning our brand as the hero could be
fatal. Consider the launch of the music streaming service Tidal.
Never heard of it? There's a reason you likely haven't. Rapper Jay-Z
founded the company with a personal investment of a whopping $56
million and a mission to "get everyone to respect music again."3
Instead of being owned by music studios or tech companies, Tidal
would be owned by musicians, allowing them to cut out the


middleman and take their products directly to market. As a result,
artists would be able to pocket more of the profits.

It may sound like a good business idea (and it was), but Jay-Z
failed to consider the mistake of positioning himself and other artists
as the heroes. He rightly saw an injustice in the world of music--
namely, that artists were not getting paid for their own work.
Instead, the money was going to record labels. But in publicly
positioning artists as the heroes fighting for a cause, he forgot that
the artists weren't the customers, the music-loving public was the
customer. After all, were only artists going to buy music from each
other? No. Under the StoryBrand framework, the customer must
always be the hero and the brand must always play the guide.

In the months leading up to the launch of Tidal, Jay-Z recruited
sixteen well-known musicians who agreed to release exclusive
content on his platform in exchange for a percentage of equity. In
their multimillion-dollar rollout, the artists stood shoulder to shoulder
at a press conference to explain their mission. Predictably, this is
where everything fell apart.

If only Jay-Z, in other ways a genius, had understood the age-old

rules of story, he might have avoided walking into a minefield.

"Water is free," Jay-Z quipped. "Music is $6 but no one wants to
pay for music." He continued, somewhat confusingly, "You should
drink free water from the tap--it's a beautiful thing. And if you want
to hear the most beautiful song, then support the artist."4

Social media, especially Twitter (now X), eviscerated Jay-Z and
Tidal. Thousands reminded him to check with the people who paid
his bills to discover water wasn't actually free. Overnight, an artist
who built his career speaking for the people sounded entitled. The
public became nauseated
famous
multimillionaire musicians guilt-trip them into paying more for their
music. The crucial mistake: Jay-Z failed to answer the one question
lingering in the subconscious of every hero customer: How are you
helping me win the day? Tidal existed to help the artists win the day,
not customers. And so it failed to launch successfully. The real
tragedy of Tidal is that both the product and the cause (an artist's

listening

row of

to a


right to be paid for their work) are just causes. I actually subscribe
to Tidal myself, not because I champion the rights of artists but
because the streaming service contains larger downloads that make
the music sound much, much better. How should Jay-Z have
positioned Tidal? In my view, he should have positioned the existing
streaming services as the villains because they are shrinking the
sound the artists had created and shorting music lovers of the best
possible experience. The artists could have talked endlessly about
how they make music for the fans and that by streaming through
Tidal, fans could finally hear music the way it was meant to be
heard, the way the artist intended. The controlling idea behind the
campaign could have been "Music the way it was mean to be heard"
and could have been repeated in all forms of messaging and
marketing, thus helping word spread about what makes Tidal
different.

In short, any message that can be framed as a contribution to a
"power to the people" movement will trump any message that is
framed as a "power to the powerful" money grab. Of course, a
"power to the powerful" money grab was likely never in the mind of
Jay-Z, yet we should all be careful about how our positioning is
perceived by our hero customers. If our fans don't believe we are
fully doing business for them, they will move on to another brand.

In fact, I had no interest in Tidal when I heard what the artists
were doing to protect their own paychecks, but I signed up
immediately when I found out you could listen to music online that
rivaled the sound quality of vinyl. In other words, when I realized
that Tidal was actually helping me, the hero customer, win the day, I
bought the product.

Jay-Z sold his majority interest in Tidal for $350 million, so he
definitely didn't lose. However, the streaming service should have
sold for billions of dollars. There's a lesson in the Tidal story for all of
us: Positioning yourself as the hero devalues your offering. In fact, it
would be a great private equity play to shop for brands with terrific
products but mistakenly positioning themselves as heroes in the
story. Anybody hunting for a business to buy could seek out
businesses making the "hero mistake," buy them cheap, change the


messaging (and culture of the company) to position the brand as the
guide, and then see a predictable increase in both revenue and the
overall value of the business itself.

Position your customer as the hero and your brand as the guide.
If you don't, your brand will struggle to survive. The hero is always
the person pulling out their wallet to make a purchase. The hero is
never the people who make the product. If you remember that, you
are more likely to get your messaging (and your business strategy)
right.

The larger point here is simple: the day we stop losing sleep over
our problems and start losing sleep over our customers' problems is
the day our business will transform into a brand customers love.

Positioning Yourself as the Hero Makes You Look Weak

Why should we never position ourselves as the hero? Because in
stories, heroes are weak. If we are tempted to position our brand as
the hero because heroes are strong and capable and the center of
attention, we should think again about the nature of a hero. In
stories, the hero is never the strongest character. Heroes are often
filled with self-doubt. They aren't sure of
ill-equipped and
themselves and they wonder if they have what it takes to get the job
done. They are often reluctant to take action, having been thrown
into the story rather than willingly engaging their challenges. In fact,
it is my view that in a good story the hero should be the secondweakest character after the victim. The guide, however, is strong.
The guide has already "been there and done that" and has
conquered the hero's challenge in their own backstory. Haymitch had
already won the Hunger Games. Yoda had already transformed into
a Jedi. They may have been weak at one time, but the guide now
has the very characteristics and abilities the hero must attain to win
the day.

The guide is the character in the story who has the strength and
the authority to help the hero win. Still, the story is not really about
the guide despite the important role they play. The story must
always be focused on the hero, and if a storyteller (or business


leader) forgets this, the audience will get confused about who the
story is really about and will lose interest. In fact, my wife and I
went to see a movie in the theaters last year and were slightly
disappointed as the credits rolled. We felt a slight cognitive
dissonance that comes when a screenwriter didn't quite get it right.
What was wrong with the script? The guide transformed. By that I
mean there was a hero who was up against a significant challenge,
and instead of the guide only serving the hero's story, the
screenwriter thought it would give a greater sense of depth if the
guide also experienced a little of their own transformation, a little
unknowing, a little self-doubt. The treatment backfired. Why?
Because the audience couldn't figure out who the hero was and who
the guide was. The guide must be strong and all-knowing. The guide
must be confident, that way the spotlight is fully on the hero and
their transformation. If both the hero and the guide are transforming
in a story, who the heck is the story about?

This idea that the guide must be strong and competent is best
demonstrated in Walt Disney's perennial hit movie Mary Poppins. In
the timeless adaptation of P. L. Travers's eight-book series of the
same name, Mary Poppins is the guide. The father, George Banks, is
actually the hero of the story, transforming from an uncaring,
distracted, hard-nosed father into a soft, caring, and attentive dad in
the end. Mary Poppins, however, guides the entire family into an
empathetic reminder of the magic of childhood, shaping the children
and the father to be engaged, compassionate, moral, and wellbehaved. She does this with lessons of wisdom and perspective, all
from a place of ultimate authority. In fact, in an early scene in the
movie Mary Poppins uses a measuring tape to gauge the yawning
chasm between the children's need for development and her own
authority as the guide. As she lifts the measuring tape to the height
of the children, the tape reveals the children as "extremely stubborn
and suspicious" and "rather inclined to giggle and doesn't put things
away," respectively. When Mary Poppins measures herself, however,
the magical tape declares her "practically perfect in every way."

In a confrontational scene near the end of the film, the hero,
George Banks, confronts Mary Poppins, demanding that she explain


herself and her actions. She stands looking down at the confused
hero from the top of the stairs and exclaims that Mary Poppins does
not explain herself to anybody.

In the overall story of life, there are guides and there are heroes.
I'm certainly not suggesting that you, as a brand, never offer to
explain yourself; however, we should learn a thing or two from Mary
Poppins: As guides, it is paramount we be competent and strong.
The hero is counting on us to know more than they know and to
have a solution to their greatest problem. The guide, then, must live
in service of the hero, and if the guide is not competent, they are
useless. Can you imagine a candidate running for president
exclaiming, "I have always wanted to be president but I've never
really believed in myself, nor do I know what I am doing, but if you
vote for me I will try my hardest to figure it out." This candidate
would generate a great deal of interest and differentiate themselves
from the rest of the field but ultimately would gain very few votes.
When we look for a leader, we enjoy a backstory of transformation
but a current demonstration of competency.

That said, arrogance never serves anybody and is ultimately a
sign of defensiveness and weakness. Mary Poppins is sure of her
philosophy, sure of her plan, and sure of her mission--to transform
the family into a healthy and functioning unit led by a patriarch who
is engaged and compassionate--but she is not in the story to serve
herself or her own transformation. She is in the story to serve the
family. The problem in the Banks family was always the father, and
by the end of the story, the problem is solved.

The idea that the guide must serve the hero is true in business,
in politics, and even in your own family. People are looking for a
guide to help them, not another hero.

Those who realize the epic story of life is not about them but
actually about the people around them somehow win in the end. It's
counterintuitive, but it's true. In fact, leaders who think the story of
life is all about them may achieve temporary successes but are
usually remembered in history's narrative as villains. If you make the
story about you, you will lose.


THE TWO CHARACTERISTICS OF A GUIDE

At StoryBrand, we have seen thousands of businesses experience an
increase in customer engagement once they stopped positioning
themselves as the hero and started positioning themselves as the
filtering their message through the StoryBrand
guide. After
framework, thousands of business leaders have realized their
websites, email blasts, digital ads, television commercials, and even
their elevator pitches have been broadcasting a self-sabotaging
message. However, adjusting our focus so that it is clearly on the
customer and playing the guide by offering that customer a solution
to their problem will radically change the way we talk about, and
even do, business.

So what do we have to do to be recognized as the guide in our

customers' lives?

We must demonstrate two characteristics in order to be

recognized as a guide: empathy and competency.

When Luke Skywalker meets Yoda, he encounters the perfect
guide. Luke is ill-equipped for the task before him, and Yoda is the
endearing character who empathetically understands Luke's
dilemma. This empathy would be of little service, of course, were it
not for Yoda's competency as a Jedi himself. Yoda understands
Luke's dilemma and has mastered the skills he must now develop if
he is going to win the day.

The guide must have this precise one-two punch of empathy and
competency in order to move the hero and the story along. These
are the characteristics the hero is looking for, and when he or she
senses them, they know they have found their guide.

The Incredible Power of Empathy

When Bill Clinton delivered his now-famous line "I feel your pain"
in 1992, he did more than just clinch a victory over George H. W.
Bush in a close presidential election; he positioned himself as the
guide in the American voters' story. In fact, many pundits believe
Clinton locked up the election during a town hall debate in which


Bush gave a rambling answer to a young woman when she asked
what the national debt meant to the average American. Clinton
countered Bush's linear, cerebral answer by asking the woman if she
knew anybody who'd lost their job. He asked whether it pained her
that she had friends out of work, and when the woman said yes, he
went on to explain how the national debt is tied to the well-being of
every American, even her and her friends.5 That's empathy. What
did the audience sense? They sensed competency in Bush but
empathy and competency in Clinton. Did Bush care? Of course, but
unless we use sound bites to express our care, our audience does
not connect. As a mentor of mine once told me: don't put people in
the mind-reading business.

When we empathize with our customers' dilemma, we create a
bond of trust. People trust those who understand them, and they
trust brands that understand them too.

Oprah Winfrey, an undeniably successful guide to millions, once
explained that the three things every human being wants most are
to be seen, heard, and understood. This is the essence of empathy.

Empathetic statements start with words like, "We understand
how it feels to . . ." or "Nobody should have to experience . . ." or
"Like you, we are frustrated by . . ." or, in the case of one
commercial inviting Toyota owners to engage their local Toyota
service center, simply, "We care about your Toyota."

Expressing empathy isn't difficult. Once we've identified our
customers' internal problems, we simply need to let them know we
understand and would like to help them find a resolution. Scan your
marketing material and make sure you've told your customers that
you care. Again, customers won't know you care until you tell them.

ARE YOU LIKE ME?
Empathy is more than just sentimental slogans though. Real
empathy means letting customers know we care about them in the
same way we care about ourselves. Customers look for brands they
have something in common with. Remember, the human brain likes
to conserve calories, so when a customer realizes they have a lot in


common with a brand, they fill in all their cognitive dissonance with
trust. Essentially, when we highlight the aspects of ourselves or our
brand that we have in common with our customer, the customer
batches their thinking, meaning they think in "chunks" rather than
details. Here's what I mean by "thinking in chunks." Last night, my
wife and I attended a dinner party and sat next to a couple we'd not
met before. As we started talking, I noticed how instinctively human
beings search for commonality. When my wife discovered that the
couple had grown up in Louisiana, there was an instant connection
as she herself hails from the north shore of Lake Pontchartrain. As
humans get to know each other, they search for shared places and
people and experiences, thus increasing the feeling that there is a
mutual understanding of life and giving us the feeling that the
person we are talking to is safe. That is why finding and expressing
commonality--whether taste in music or shared values or shared
stages of life--and talking about those commonalities is such a
powerful marketing tool.

Once, while counseling a politician, I explained that even if you
are in a room of people who are completely different than you, you
must find and focus on a common experience, especially if you need
to express disagreement. For example: Like you, I am deeply
concerned about the cost of health care, but I'm equally concerned
about government incompetency to run our health-care system. In
my view, socialized medicine disincentivizes innovation, which could
ultimately lead to a radical decline in patient care and even longevity
of life. You and I are the same in that we believe Americans are
paying too much for too little when it comes to health care, but if we
put our heads together, practical people like us will find a solution.
You're right, though, that this problem must be dealt with. We
certainly agree on that.

The point is this: Your brand and your customer are alike. You
have shared experiences and a shared view of life. A recent Discover
Card television campaign tapped into the power of empathy by
showing customers who call Discover's customer service line and
end up talking to an exact replica of themselves. As they talk, the
customer realizes they have everything in common with their credit


card company; in fact, they are exactly the same. The message?
Discover Card will take care of you the same way you would take
care of yourself. We understand you. We know you.

The Necessity of Competency

In the first edition of Building a StoryBrand I listed the two
characteristics of a guide as empathy and authority, but the word
authority never sat right with me. After all, nobody likes a know-it-all
and nobody wants to be preached at. The better word, then, is
competency. As a guide, you do not have to be perfect, but you do
have to be competent in your field of expertise. This is paramount.
This is why Mary Poppins refused to budge in her self-confidence as
a guide. Were she to have compromised her higher ground as it
related to her competency to positively shape the future of a child,
the movie would have had two heroes and no guide and as such
would have been ruined. Competency matters, and if you actually
have it, let's not mess around with self-deprecation. Your hero needs
more than a friend; they need a useful friend.

Imagine walking into a nutritionist's office for the first time,

determined to get into the best shape of your life.

"I'd like to lose thirty pounds," you might tell her. "It's been a

struggle for a long time, but I'm ready."

How would you feel if the nutritionist, upon hearing your stated
objective, looked at you, sighed, pinched an inch of the spare tire
around their waist, and said, "Me too."

It wouldn't take you long to realize you'd chosen the wrong

nutritionist.

The guide needs to know what they are doing and should have
serious experience helping other heroes win the day. Wouldn't you
agree that Gordon Ramsey's television show would be ruined if,
instead of being the authoritative chef and restaurateur, he shyly
confessed he knew nothing about fixing a restaurant but looked
forward to learning with his hopeless client?

At this point in the journey, many readers wonder how they can
demonstrate their own competency without making themselves the


hero. It's a good question. The truth is, as a guide, you can talk
abo