hat it takes to run with the big dogs.


Even those who convince themselves they do not want status often
want the status that comes with not wanting status.

As I mentioned earlier in the book, the primary function of our
brain is to help us survive and thrive, and status, by some, can be
perceived as gaining more security in a tribe or society. If our brand,
then, can help our customers become more esteemed, respected,
and appealing in a social context, we are likely offering something
they want.

So how can our brand offer status? Here are four ideas:

Offer access: My wife loves using her Starbucks membership
card because it gains her points, which gains her status and
the occasional free latte. We've had many conversations
about the intangibility of said status, but I've learned not to
argue. She's excited to be on her way to some kind of doublepump jazzy diamond level, which I'm pretty sure means she
can cut in front of people at the drive-through.

Create scarcity: Offering a limited number of a specific item

creates scarcity, and owning something that is scarce is often
seen as a status symbol. When Jeep puts a badge that reads
"limited" on the back of their Grand Cherokee, they're
promoting the scarcity of that particular packaging of the
luxury SUV, thus making it more desirable.

Offer a premium: Most companies earn 70 percent or more of
their revenue from a small percentage of their clients. Few,
though, identify those clients and offer them a title such as
"Preferred" or "Diamond Member." I love being an "Emerald
Club" member with National Car Rental because it means I
get to bypass the counter, jump in a car, and drive off. We
even recommend a status-associated title for the nonprofit
brands we work with. People will be much more likely to
donate if they know they are an "Anchor Donor" and even
more likely if they get special privileges like updates from the
founder or access to other donors at special, elite-level
fundraisers.


Offer identity association: Premium brands like Mercedes

and Rolex sell status as much as they do luxury. Is it worth it?
Depends on who you ask. Status really does open doors, and
by associating their brand (and thus their customers) with
success and refinement, they offer the sort of status that may
make others esteem or even envy them.

2. Union That Makes the Hero Whole (The Need for
Something External to Create Completeness)

Another way to offer a satisfying resolution is for your brand to
offer some kind of perceived completeness. The reason stories often
end with the union of lovers has little to do with the desire for love
or sex. Rather, union between male and female characteristics in a
story symbolizes the achievement of completeness.

When the prince rescues the princess and the two characters
unite at the end of the story, the audience witnesses what they
subconsciously consider the joining of two halves. The subconscious
idea is that the man needs to be tamed and the woman needs
provision and protection in order for the two to become "whole," and
in this context, "whole" really means safe and/or useful in the
context of a family-building unit, which is tied to survival in the
sense that it's the safest way to contribute to the continuation of our
species. Traditional though it may seem, the formula works for most
moviegoing audiences. This same popular formula is used in a
million or more love songs and, in its opposite form, the million or
more empathetic rants belted out by those who aren't getting any.

comedies use

This need to be completed by an external source doesn't have to
include a wedding or even a male or female character, however.
formula. Arnold
Many buddy
same
Schwarzenegger comically portrays a more
feminine, refined
personality compared to his rough-and-tumble brother played by
Danny DeVito in the hit comedy Twins. The principle, however, is the
same: two likable but different characters come together to form a
complete unit in order to accomplish a specific survival objective.

the


The controlling idea of this kind of ending is that the character is
made complete (or equipped to defeat a foe) by somebody or
something outside themselves. In love stories, of course, it's all
about the union of male and female characteristics, but the
emotional need this kind of story delivers is much greater. These
stories are about being made whole by external provision.

So what are some of the ways we can offer external help for

customers looking to become complete? Here are a few examples:

Reduced anxiety: For years, brands that sell basic items like

dish detergent and glass cleaner have almost comically
positioned their products as anti-anxiety medication. The hero
in the commercial starts out in anxiety, raising their hands to
the heavens, questioning God about the meaning of life
because the grease won't come off their casserole dish. As
the hero in the commercial uses the new dish detergent, his
or her sense of frustration subsides until, at last, they're able
to see their bright, shining face glowing back at them in the
polished platter, and then off they go into the sunset. What is
the brand really offering? Satisfaction for a job well done? A
feeling of closure about a clean dish? A better, more peaceful
life? All of the above. Will the use of your product lead to the
relief of stress and a feeling of completeness? If so, talk about
it and show it in your marketing material.

Reduced workload: Customers who don't have the right tools
must work harder because they are, well, incomplete. But
what if a tool you offer could give the customer what they're
missing? Whether they're selling wheelbarrows, software,
jackhammers, or a fishing apparatus, manufacturers have
been positioning tools as "the thing that will make you
superhuman" for decades. In this instance, consider your
brand not unlike the character Q in the James Bond films.
Your customer comes into your secret cave and explains their
objective, and you reveal all the tools you offer.


More time: For many customers, time is scarce, and if our

product can expand time, we're offering to solve an external
problem that is causing an internal frustration. Not being able
to "fit it all in" is often perceived by our customers as a
personal deficiency. Any tool, system, philosophy, or even
person who can expand time may offer a sense of
completeness.

The list, of course, could go on for pages. The only question you
need to ask if you're wanting to offer a satisfactory resolution to
your customer's story is, How does my customer feel incomplete and
how can my product be positioned to offer that completion? If you
ask and answer this question in a short, simple way, you're looking
at a terrific messaging sound bite.

3. Ultimate Self-Realization or Acceptance (The Need to
Reach Our Potential)

Movies like Rudy, Hoosiers, and Chariots of Fire all tap into the
human desire to reach the utmost of our human potential. And it's
not just sports movies. Legally Blonde, The Theory of Everything,
and Whiplash are all about heroes who face significant challenges in
their journey to prove themselves. The desire to be more fuels the
plot. Once proven, the heroes realize an inner peace and can finally
accept themselves, not only because they've reached their potential
but because they've learned to respect themselves along the way.

An outward demonstration of worth isn't always necessary to
create this kind of resolution. Heroes can also take an internal
journey to arrive at the same conclusion. When Bridget Jones
realizes she is too good for the boss with whom she desired a
relationship, she came to an ultimate self-realization that she is
"worthy" and thus arrived at a state of stability. And while it's true
she didn't close the story loop of uniting with the man she wanted,
resolution is brought about as she abandons that goal in exchange
for the greater fulfillment of self-acceptance and contentment.


In 2013, the soap company Dove released a series of short films
featuring women who sat to be sketched by an FBI-trained forensic
artist. Without actually seeing the women, the artist would draw
each woman based on how she described herself. Later, the artist
would draw the same woman based on how a stranger described
her. The reveal was shocking. The sketches drawn from the
stranger's description were always more beautiful than the ones in
which the women described themselves. The point: many women
don't realize how beautiful they are. The ad was an attempt to help
women accept themselves and find greater contentment in their
intrinsic beauty. Dove acted as the guide helping the hero transform.
Whether it's by fulfilling some purpose or accepting themselves
as they are, this offer to return our hero to contentment fulfills a
universal human desire: self-acceptance.

How can a brand offer self-acceptance? Here are a few ideas:

Inspiration: If an aspect of your brand can offer or be

associated with an inspirational feat, open the floodgates.
Brands like Red Bull, Harvard Business Review, Under Armour,
The Ken Blanchard Company, Michelob Ultra, and even GMC
have associated themselves with athletic and intellectual
accomplishment and thus a sense of self-actualization.
Acceptance: Helping people accept themselves as they are
isn't just a thoughtful thing to do; it's good marketing. Not
unlike the Dove campaign, American Eagle turned heads
when they launched their Aerie campaign. In the campaign,
American Eagle used real people as models and refused to
retouch the images. Tackling body-image issues, American
Eagle went beyond basic product promotion and contributed
to universal self-acceptance among their clientele.

Transcendence: Brands that invite customers to participate in
a larger movement offer a greater, more impactful life. TOMS
Shoes built a name for themselves by selling stylish shoes
while simultaneously giving a pair to somebody in need in
what they called a "one for one" model. Those who wore the


shoes claimed a major factor in deciding to make the
purchase was a sense of involvement with a larger
movement. At less than ten years old, the for-profit brand
sold for more than $700 million. Another example of a brand
that helps customers achieve a level of transcendence is
Daymond John's clothing brand FUBU, an acronym for "For Us
By Us," in reference to the African American community being
represented in the marketplace. The brand offered more than
fashion; it offered a sense of unity, transcendence, and
entrepreneurialism for the African American community. FUBU
has earned more than $6 billion to date.

CLOSING THE STORY LOOPS

The idea behind the success module in the SB7 framework is that
our sound bite, in this category, offers to close a story loop. Human
beings are looking for resolutions to their external, internal, and
philosophical problems, and they can achieve this through, among
other
and
transcendence. If our products can help people achieve any or all of
these things, we should make this clear in our StoryBrand
BrandScript.

self-acceptance,

self-realization,

things,

status,

KEEP IT SIMPLE

Offering to close a story loop is much simpler than you think. Even
the inclusion of smiley, happy people on your website is a strong
way to depict the potential closing of a story loop. People want to be
happy, and images of happy people hint that your product will
deliver.


If you sell rugs, a successful resolution might look like a beautiful
room or be captured in the sound bite "a room that finally feels
finished." If you sell ice cream, a successful resolution might be "a
rich, creamy taste of heaven." Do you sell camping gear? Here's a
sound bite for your product tags: "always prepared for adventure."

While I've been slightly philosophical in this chapter, try not to
overthink it. What problem are you resolving in your customer's life,
and what does that resolution look like after they buy your product?
Stick to basic answers because they really do work. Then, when you
get good, strong sound bites, start diving deeper into the levels of
problems your brand resolves. You don't need to think about
external, internal, and philosophical sound bites at first. Just give me
a sound bite that screams resolution, then sharpen the language as
you refine your marketing message.

The important idea in this section is that we need to repeatedly
show how our product or service can make somebody's life better. If
we don't tell people where we're taking them, they won't follow. A
story has to go somewhere.

Have you told your customers what sort of life you want to guide

them into?

Next, let's take a look at the biggest motivator your customer has
for making a purchase: the desire to become somebody different.
Before that, though, brainstorm your sound bites for the success
element of your StoryBrand BrandScript.

CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERS LISTEN

Go to StoryBrand.AI and either create a BrandScript or log in to
your existing BrandScript.
Brainstorm the successful resolution you're helping your
customers achieve. What will their lives look like if they use your
products and services?
Use the bullet points in the success module of your BrandScript
to capture your best answers.




CHAPTER 11

PEOPLE WANT YOUR BRAND TO
PARTICIPATE IN THEIR
TRANSFORMATION

Even though you've filled out the principal elements of your
StoryBrand BrandScript, you've likely noticed there's one element
left. This final element will serve as an overall character arc for your
customer's journey. In fact, as we've discussed what your hero
wants, what their challenges are, and what positive resolution your
brand can provide, we've only danced around the greatest
motivation your customer has to place an order. This single
motivating factor is the secret driving force behind nearly every
decision we make as human beings. Whether we're buying lawn
furniture or choosing a mate, we can't escape a certain deep desire.

I'm talking about the human desire to transform.
Everybody wants to change. Everybody wants to be somebody
different, somebody better, or, perhaps, somebody who simply
becomes more self-accepting. This desire for transformation is by
design. Humans start as tiny babies, learning color and smell and
sound and attachment. As we grow, we begin playing games in
which we are animals or warriors or princesses or wizards. From the
beginning, we long to grow and change and adapt and develop. This
desire, by the way, never stops, all the way to our final days. And
while we can't become wizards, we do want to become better and
better versions of ourselves. Brands who offer to participate in this


universal and deep-rooted desire and who are successful in
delivering an aspirational identity often create brand evangelists.

Ever wonder how Taylor Swift created such raving fans? Her
music is only part of the story. Mostly, young women identified with
her strength, her ease, her willingness to share, her generosity, and,
well, her identity. In short, she stands as a person many young
women would like to become, and that isn't a bad thing. The same
could be said for many of our sports heroes, our favorite actors and
comics, and even many world leaders. Our subconscious minds are
always looking for examples of who we want to be, and when we
find one of those examples, our primitive brains, in small ways, have
trouble differentiating themselves from ourselves. Why else do
people get so defensive when you diminish their heroes? In their
minds, you aren't just diminishing a public figure; you're diminishing
the part of them that has attached their identity to that public figure.
You're not just insulting Taylor Swift; you're insulting millions of
people who want to be (and perhaps are) like Taylor Swift. If you
don't believe me, just open your favorite social media app and
comment about how you aren't sure Taylor made the right choice in
shoes today. You will quickly be hung in the town square and your
body will be dragged through the streets by teens leading teams of
rhinestone-clad show horses.

Changing the subject in the name of personal safety, when you
look closely at your StoryBrand BrandScript, you'll see the character
arc already taking shape. Your brand really is helping people become
better versions of themselves, which is a beautiful thing. You are
helping your customers become wiser, more equipped, more
physically fit, more accepted, and more at peace. Like it or not (and
we hope you like it), we are all participating in our customers'
transformation, which is exactly what they want us to do.

Again, brands that participate in the transformation of their
customers' identity create passionate brand evangelists. Want critics
to be hung in the town square and dragged through the street by
teams of My Little Ponies when people disparage your brand? Keep
reading.


THE DESIRE TO TRANSFORM RUNS DEEP

At the beginning of a story, the hero is usually flawed, filled with
self-doubt, and ill-equipped for the task set before them. Faced with
unbounded conflict, they meet a mysterious but competent guide
who aids them on their journey. The conflict then begins to
strengthen the character. Forced into action, the hero develops skills
and accrues the experience needed to defeat their foe. Though the
hero is still filled with doubt, they summon the courage to engage
the fight and, in the climactic scene, defeat the villain, proving once
and for all that they have changed and that they are now competent
to face challenges as better versions of themselves, revealing that all
along the story was about character transformation.

This same character arc, by the way, appears in The Old Man and
the Sea, Pride and Prejudice, Pinocchio, Hamlet, Sleeping Beauty,
Swan Lake, Tommy Boy, and thousands of other popular stories.
Why? Because it's our story. Feelings of self-doubt are universal, as
is the desire to become somebody competent and courageous. And
all of this matters when it comes to the messages we create to
brand our products and services.

As it relates to creating identify-transformation sound bites, a few
important questions can prompt effective answers: Who does our
customer want to become? What kind of person do they need to be
to resolve their conflict? What characteristics would effectively
describe our customer's aspirational identity?

SMART BRANDS DEFINE AN ASPIRATIONAL
IDENTITY

Recently I ran down to Home Depot to get a stud finder so I could
install shelving in the garage. Next to the stud finders in the tool
section was a selection of Gerber knives. Gerber is a knife company


out of Portland, Oregon, that makes a range of multipurpose
pocketknives. Their commercial campaign, however, offers the buyer
a lot more than a knife. They sell something intangible. They sell an
identity, and by that I mean they sell an association with a kind of
person you and I can become. I'd been noticing Gerber commercials
for a long time, and even though I knew exactly what they were
doing to my subconscious, I wanted one anyway. But why? I thought
to myself as I stood there staring at the knives. I'm a writer. The
only thing I need a knife for is to make a peanut butter and jelly
sandwich.

Still, the pull was palpable. What if I had to swim under a boat to
cut away a tangled rope from the propeller? Or slice a pant leg off
my bloody jeans to make a tourniquet for my injured arm? What if
Taylor Swift fans stuffed me into a burlap sack and threw me off a
pier? Couldn't I use the knife to cut my way out?

Thankfully, my executive brain overpowered my primitive brain,
and I walked away with just the stud finder. But why was it so hard?
Why did I want the knife so badly? And why did I change my mind
and go back to buy the knife anyway? Certainly they make great
knives, but there are many other companies making great knives
and I'd never really cared or noticed.

The reason I wanted the knife is simple. Gerber defined an
aspirational identity for their customers and then associated their
product with that identity. The aspirational identity of a Gerber knife
customer is tough, adventurous, fearless, action-oriented, and
competent to do a hard job. Epitomized in their advertising
campaign Hello Trouble, a Gerber customer is positioned as the kind
of person who sails boats into storms, rides bulls, rescues people
from floods, and yes, cuts tangled ropes from boat propellers. In
their
these
aspirational, heroic figures cast over anthemic music and a narrator
reciting the lines:

television commercials

they present

images of

Hello, Trouble.
It's been a while since we last met.


But I know you're still out there.
And I have a feeling you're looking for me.
You wish I'd forget you, don't you, Trouble?
Perhaps it's you that has forgotten me.
Perhaps I need to come find you, remind you who I am.1

The commercial is terrific. One day, to my surprise, a StoryBrand
alumnus, who happens to be one of the Army Rangers about whom
the movie Black Hawk Down was made, stopped by the house. We
caught up for a moment, and then he gave me a little thank-you
present, a Gerber knife. He even had my name engraved on the
blade. He knew I liked the commercial and so offered it as a gift. To
this day I keep that knife clipped to the dashboard of my 1978 FJ40
Land Cruiser. Occasionally I'll take the knife into the house, stare at
a jar of peanut butter, and say, "Hello, Trouble."
I may be just a writer, but I love that knife.
But let me ask you a question. Was the knife I bought a waste of
money? I mean, let's say I did pay forty dollars for the knife and
never used it. Did I get ripped off?

I've asked that question to hundreds of people who are familiar
with the StoryBrand messaging framework, and the answer has
always come back the same: no. It was not a waste of money. It
was well worth the forty dollars. I can't help but agree. The truth is
when I buy a Gerber knife I get something more than a knife. In a
way, Gerber helped me become a better person. They defined an
aspirational identity and invited me to step into that identity. The
knife made me feel more tough and adventurous, and they even
created a moment between two friends. And that's worth a great
deal more than forty dollars.

HOW DOES YOUR CUSTOMER WANT TO BE
DESCRIBED BY OTHERS?


The best way to define an aspirational identity that our customers
may be attracted to is to consider how they want their friends to talk
about them. Think about it. When others talk about you, what do
you want them to say? How we answer that question reveals who it
is we'd like to be.

It's the same for our customers. As it relates to your brand, how
does your customer want to be perceived by their friends and
family? And can you help them become that kind of person? Can
some aspect of your product participate in your customer's identity
transformation? If you offer executive coaching, your clients may
want to be seen as competent, generous, and disciplined. If you sell
sports equipment, your customers likely want to be perceived as
active, fit, and successful in their athletic pursuits.

Once we know who our customers want to be, we will have
language to use in emails, blog posts, and all manner of messaging
collateral.

A GUIDE OFFERS MORE THAN A PRODUCT AND A
PLAN

Playing the guide is more than a marketing strategy; it's a position of
the heart. When a brand commits itself to helping customers define
internal, and
their heroic ambition;
philosophical problems; and inspire them with an aspirational
identity, they do more than sell products--they change lives. And
leaders who care more about changing lives than they do about
selling products tend to do a good bit of both.

their external,

resolve

Last year StoryBrand consulted with Dave Ramsey and his team.
Ramsey Solutions may be the best example of a narrative-based
company I know, and Dave himself is a terrific example of a guide.
Over a series of workshops, dinners, and speeches, we introduced
the Ramsey team to the SB7 framework, less as a way of educating


them than as a way of giving vocabulary to what they were already
doing.

Dave Ramsey hosts one of the largest radio shows in America
with more than eight million daily listeners. On the show he offers
financial advice and strategies that revolve around tackling and
conquering personal debt. Unlike many advisers, though, Ramsey
offers more than wisdom; he offers a narrative map his customers
can enter into. He comes back from every break on his radio show
with the same line: "Welcome back to The Dave Ramsey Show,
where debt is dumb, cash is king, and the paid-off home mortgage
has taken the place of the BMW as the status symbol of choice."
There they are, the elements of story, complete with an identity to
step into and a new status symbol to go along with that new
identity.

Though Dave's face is prominent on book covers and billboards
promoting his show, he never positions himself as the hero. Instead,
Ramsey has a near obsession with his listeners' stories. Dave's
understanding of his listeners' external problems (consumer debt
and financial illiteracy), internal problems (confusion and a feeling of
their philosophical problem (credit card
hopelessness), and
companies don't care about your financial well-being and will gladly
sell you debt you can't afford) engages listeners in a living story.
Always entertaining, Dave never misses an opportunity to embolden
his listeners with an aspirational identity, encourage their progress,
and remind them that tackling their financial challenges offers them
a leap toward personal transformation.

To cap it off, Dave offers a brilliantly placed climactic scene in his
customers' story. After listeners execute a plan he offers through his
Financial Peace University, they are invited on his show to perform a
"Debt-Free Scream." People travel from thousands of miles away to
be featured on the show, and when they arrive, dozens of the
Ramsey team surround the accomplished heroes with applause as
the heroes shout, "We're debt-free!"

Once a listener has completed the journey, Dave lets them know
they've changed, that they are different now, and that there is
nothing they can't accomplish if they apply themselves.


GREAT BRANDS OBSESS ABOUT THE
TRANSFORMATION OF THEIR CUSTOMERS

When we first met with Dave, I was surprised to learn he didn't
know that affirming the hero's transformation was an oft-included
scene at the end of many stories. I mean, he knew it intuitively but
had never noticed it as a plot point in hundreds of stories. After the
climactic scene (the debt-free scream), the guide often comes back
to affirm the transformation of the hero, telling them that they are
now a different and better person.

At the end of Star Wars: A New Hope, the ghost of Obi-Wan
stands next to Luke Skywalker as he's rewarded for bravery. In The
King's Speech, Lionel tells King George he will be a great king. Peter
Brand sits Billy Beane down in the movie Moneyball and lets him
know he's hit the equivalent of a home run as the manager of the
A's.

The main purpose these scenes serve

is to mark the
transformation the hero has experienced so the audience has a point
of reference that contrasts the hero's character from the story's
beginning. The audience needs to be told very clearly how far the
hero has come, especially since the hero usually struggles with
crippling doubt right up until the end and they don't even realize
how much they have changed.

The principle here is this: A hero needs somebody else to step
into the story to tell them they've transformed. Heroes do not realize
their transformation intuitively. They must be told by somebody else,
and that somebody is the guide. That somebody is you.

There are hundreds of thousands of financial advisers, and
thousands of them have written books. Hundreds of those who've
written books have podcasts or radio shows, and yet Dave Ramsey
enjoys a wider popularity. Why? Well, certainly his advice is good.
Nobody is attracted to incompetence. But I'm convinced it is the way
he frames the customer's journey as a narrative and participates in
and then affirms their transformation that sets him apart. Also, his


messaging is clear: short, simple sound bites. And he has been
repeating those sound bites for years.

IDENTITY TRANSFORMATION

In the final module of your StoryBrand BrandScript, we've included a
section that will allow you to define an identity transformation your
customer may experience as they relate to your brand.

Who does your customer want to become as they engage your

products and services?

At StoryBrand, we want our customers to become clear and
precise communicators. When customers finish this book or conclude
their time with one of our StoryBrand certified coaches, we want
them to return to the office and have people wondering what
happened to them. How did they become so messaging savvy? How
did they become so clear in their thinking? Why are their messaging
ideas so good? Did they suddenly get a PhD in persuasion?

Similar to the success module of your StoryBrand BrandScript,
the aspirational identity section answers a question about how the
story ends, except instead of telling us where the story is going, it
tells us who the hero has become.

Brands that realize their customers are human, filled with
emotion, driven to transform, and in need of help truly do more than
sell products; they change people. Dave Ramsey changes people.
Apple changes people. TOMS Shoes changes people. Gerber knives
changes people. It's no wonder brands like these have such
passionate fans and do so well in the marketplace.

The statement you want to finish in order to define an identity
transformation for your customer is this: We help our customers go
from "X" to "Y." Let me explain.


EXAMPLES OF IDENTITY TRANSFORMATION

Thousands of StoryBrand clients have defined an aspirational identity
for their customers and begun to participate in their transformation.
Because of this, more and more companies are not just improving
the world through their products and services; they're actually
improving the way their customers see themselves. Offering an
aspirational identity adds enormous value to everything else that we
offer.

Here are some examples of aspirational

identities

from

StoryBrand clients like you:

PET FOOD BRAND
From: Passive dog owner
To: Every dog's hero

FINANCIAL ADVISER
From: Confused and ill-equipped
To: Competent and smart

SHAMPOO BRAND
From: Anxious and glum
To: Carefree and radiant

Have you thought about who you want your customer to
become? Participating in your customer's transformation can give
new life and meaning to your business. When you identify an
aspirational identity for your customers, your brand will not only
transform customers but will begin to inspire and unite your own
team. When your team realizes they sell more than products, that
they guide people toward a stronger belief in themselves, their work
will have greater meaning.


Spend some time thinking about who you want your customers
to become. How can you improve the way they perceive themselves?
How can your brand participate in your customer's identity

transformation?

CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERS LISTEN

Go to StoryBrand.AI and either create a BrandScript or log in to
your existing BrandScript.
Brainstorm the aspirational identity of your customer. Who do
they want to become? How do they want to be perceived by
others?
Use the "to" lines of your BrandScript to define an aspirational
identity. Filling out the "from" line is then simple. It's simply the
opposite of whatever you define as their aspirational identity
captured in the "to" line.


CHAPTER 12

DEFINE YOUR CONTROLLING IDEA

Congratulations, you now have a StoryBrand BrandScript, which
means you have seven categories of sound bites you can repeat
over and over to grow your business. Trust me, you will be pleased
at how quickly and how much these sound bites cause customers to
pay attention to your brand. Orders will go up.

After taking tens of thousands of businesses through the
StoryBrand framework, though, I realized there was one element
missing from the old BrandScript. I've added this element into the
new BrandScript because I think it's that important. In fact, this
specific sound bite is so important that if you create only this one bit
of copy I believe it will grow your business significantly. What is it? I
call it the controlling idea.

A good campaign begins and ends with a controlling idea. I first
heard the term controlling idea when I was researching how to write
a screenplay and found the idea helpful, not just in writing stories
but in writing books and, well, wireframing websites. A controlling
idea answers the question: What is this story about? The controlling
idea for Disney's The Lion King, a retelling of Shakespeare's Hamlet
in many ways, might be: a young lion must gain the confidence
necessary to confront his evil uncle, who murdered his father, so
that he can take his rightful place as king of the jungle and return
order and life to his homeland.


After a storyteller determines their controlling idea, they must
submit all copy to that idea if the story is going to make their point
and resonate with an audience. If our controlling idea involves a lost
dog returning home to his family, who realize how much they loved
the previously neglected dog, we should not include too many
scenes about a food critic attempting to start their own restaurant.
Both, to be sure, may be entertaining stories, but when we combine
plots the audience has to burn too many mental calories trying to
figure out what the story is about. In short, subplots aside, a good
story will support only one major plot.

Certainly a story can present multiple ideas, and those ideas are
sometimes subjective, but very few stories are commercially
successful if the plot is up for interpretation. Stories that have a
singular focus, such as "an underdog having their day" or "good
triumphing over evil", gain much more popular appeal, if for no other
reason than they require less mental effort to consume and enjoy.

How the clarity of a controlling idea in a narrative relates to your
brand message is simple. If I spend two minutes looking at your
marketing collateral, I need to understand the main idea you are
trying to communicate, and I need to be able to state it back to you
clearly. For instance, one of the clients in my mastermind, Jeff
Tomaszewski, owns a franchise of gyms called MaxStrength Fitness.
As I reviewed Jeff's website and marketing collateral, I struggled to
understand what differentiated his gym from the thousands of
others in North America.

"What makes your gym different?" I asked Jeff.
"Well," he said, "What makes us different, I believe, is that our
trainers work with our clients for only twenty minutes, twice each
week. They focus on resistance training rather than cardio. The
workouts are challenging but short. And the results are incredible."

"So this is a program for busy people who don't have the time to

live at the gym?" I asked.
"Exactly," he replied.
After asking if he had a franchise in Nashville yet (because I
wanted to sign up immediately), I asked why that controlling idea
wasn't all over his website. In fact, the idea that a customer could


get results while working out for only twenty minutes twice each
week was buried well below the fold on his website, deep into the
text toward the bottom of the page.

Reviewing Jeff's website reminded me how

important a
controlling idea is in any marketing or messaging campaign. In a
messaging context, it is the one idea you want your audience to
remember most, and as such your messaging collateral should be
delivered like a memorization exercise. In other words, once you
come up with your controlling idea, you want to repeat it so many
times your audience practically memorizes it. For Jeff, the controlling
idea was "You work out for twenty minutes, twice each week." This
needed to be stated clearly in the header and repeated over each
section of his website, in the title or subtitle of the lead generator, in
every subsequent email that went out after the lead generator was
downloaded, on the "about us" page, in the "a word from our CEO"
video, in customer testimonials, and on and on. As far as I'm
concerned, the message, shortened to "twenty minutes, twice,"
could be printed on hats and coffee mugs and T-shirts and banners
being dragged by airplanes in the sky.

A controlling idea needs to be a complete idea, but I will let
"twenty minutes, twice" slide if the thought has been explained in
length enough times that people understand what the abbreviated
version of it means.

HAVE YOU DEFINED A CONTROLLING IDEA?

Most small businesses have not defined their controlling idea and
therefore distribute a muddled message into the marketplace. When
I look at your messaging collateral, would I be able to tell what your
controlling idea is or, more importantly, whether you even have one?
If not, you've got an amazing opportunity to grow your business
through clear messaging, marketing material, and, most importantly,
word of mouth.


How do you come up with your controlling idea? You already
have. If you've created a StoryBrand BrandScript, your controlling
idea is staring right back at you. As you read your BrandScript, ask
yourself, "What is this story really about?" or, better, "What is the
moral of the story I am inviting customers into?" Is the moral "You
shouldn't have to pay more for car insurance" or "Natural peanut
butter shouldn't taste like cardboard"? Whatever it is, your
controlling idea is "the point" you're trying to make in all your
messaging collateral.

You should have one controlling idea, and it should be stated
simply. It should be easy to understand. Your BrandScript forces
your story to be simple and clear. Your controlling idea should get a
positive reaction from your customers (without you having to explain
it at all) and should be repeated several times as a customer scrolls
down the page. Remember, good messaging is an exercise in
memorization, meaning you are trying to get your customer to
memorize your controlling idea so they can repeat it to their friends
and your business will grow. Short, simple statements repeated word
for word, over and over, is an effective messaging strategy.

Your controlling idea is so important that I've added it to your
StoryBrand BrandScript tool. You will see a space for it at the bottom
of the BrandScript at StoryBrand.AI. Feel free to edit and refine your
controlling idea as the story of your brand develops in your own
mind.

If it will help, use the StoryBrand Brain at StoryBrand.AI to define
and refine your controlling idea. If you take only one thing from this
book, please leave with a controlling idea and use it often. If you do,
you will get the money back that you paid for this book a thousand
times over.

In the next section, I will guide you through a process to take
your clear message and use it in all manner of marketing and
messaging collateral. For now, though, take some time to determine
a controlling idea for your brand. What is the main differentiator that
sets you apart from your competition? What one idea would most
quickly clarify your offer? What idea do you want your customers to
repeat as a way of introducing your brand to others? These are the


kinds of questions you want to consider as you brainstorm the
controlling idea section of your BrandScript.

CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERS LISTEN

Go to StoryBrand.AI and either create a BrandScript or log in to
your existing BrandScript.
Brainstorm the controlling idea sound bite for your brand. What
is the moral of the story you are inviting customers into? What's
the one big idea you want your StoryBrand BrandScript to
communicate?
Use the "controlling idea" line of your BrandScript to capture
your new and important sound bite.


SECTION 3

EXECUTING YOUR
STORYBRAND
MESSAGING AND
MARKETING CAMPAIGN


CHAPTER 13

HOW TO EXECUTE A FLAWLESS
STORYBRAND MESSAGING
CAMPAIGN

We will see an increased engagement from customers only if we
in a marketing and
implement our StoryBrand BrandScript
messaging campaign. The BrandScript you've put together has to
show up on websites and in email campaigns, elevator pitches, and
sales scripts. The sound bites you have created must be repeated
over and over for years to come if you are hoping to grow your
business.

The degree to which you implement your StoryBrand BrandScript
into marketing and messaging material is the degree to which
people will understand why they need your products and/or services
and begin to place orders.

It's surprisingly easy to fool yourself into thinking that just
because you clarified your message, customers can read your mind.
Let's be clear: Your message is clear to you, but until you speak it
and repeat it, it isn't clear to anybody else. To get results, your
message must be clear in the minds of others.

This, then, is the goal of a communication campaign: If you are
running for office, your job is to install your clear message into the
minds of the body politic. If you are building a brand, your job is to
act as though your products and services are running for office.


Years ago, I was asked to come to the headquarters of a
presidential favorite. The candidate had served as governor of a
large state and went into the campaign with an enormous lead and
the locked-down electoral votes of his own state. He had national
name recognition, had over a hundred million dollars behind his
campaign, and had the support of his political party behind him. And
he was failing. His campaign was shrinking in the polls month after
month.

When I met with his team, I introduced them to the StoryBrand
framework and emphasized why their candidate needed to repeat
sound bites--sound bites that clarified what the country needed;
sound bites that defined our nation's biggest problems from an
external, internal, and philosophical perspective; sound bites that
positioned himself as the guide and the body politic as the hero;
sound bites that laid out a simple, three-step plan; sound bites that
painted a clear picture of a bright future; sound bites that warned
voters of the negative consequences of wasting their vote on
somebody else; sound bites that offered an aspirational identity for
the country; and finally a sound bite that affirmed a vote for him
was the right decision.

His campaign leadership, sadly, explained that their candidate
was not a "sound bite kind of guy." Instead, they told me he was a
scholar. He had written books about his policy ideas. He was
authentic and intelligent. He was more at home in a town hall
meeting answering questions off the cuff and believed in the
necessity of nuance. He wanted to be in meetings, studying the
issues, devising plans to solve America's biggest problems. Honestly,
the more they described their candidate, the more I thought he
should be president. And the more they described him, the more I
realized he would never be president. I told them so.

"You are doing everything to prepare this man to be president

and nothing to get him elected," I said.

This same dynamic is likely true of you and your products and
services. You did the work to create terrific products and services
and are capable of delivering. But building great products and
services and being able to talk about them effectively requires two


separate sets of skills. The idea that "if you build it, they will come"
may work to summon ghosts to a baseball field in Kansas, but it will
not work to grow your business. To sell products and services, you
must build them and then talk about them. And when you're done
talking about them, you must talk about them again. And then
again.

Having spent ten years helping brands clarify their message, I've
come to believe people have to read or hear your message about
eight times before they internalize and respond to that message. On
top of that, people ignore most commercial messages, so you have
to repeat your clear message over and over for them to hear it even
once. If 90 percent of all commercial messages are ignored, for
instance, you will have to repeat your message eighty times to get
somebody to hear it eight times. Your clear message needs to be
stated clearly in elevator pitches, passed around in conversation,
repeated clearly on your website, spoken of in your lead generators,
talked about in YouTube videos, printed on your swag, painted on
the wall of your retail establishment, written about in emails and
snail mail, and spoken
the mouths of your sales
representatives. Your message should be communicated in any
digital ads you create, podcast openings and closings, keynote
presentations, and so on and so on. In other words, your clear
message is going to require a campaign.

from

The third section of Building a StoryBrand gives both large and
small companies tangible, practical steps they can take to apply their
BrandScript into messaging and marketing collateral. Whether you're
a mom-and-pop shop, a start-up, a personal brand, a multibilliondollar organization, or even a presidential candidate, in the following
chapters I'll show you the lessons we've learned from the thousands
of companies who have effectively created and executed on their
StoryBrand BrandScript to see radical results. The first step, though,
is simple: talk differently.

CLARIFY AND MEMORIZE YOUR SOUND BITES


Stop rambling. When you talk about your brand, know what you are
going to say long before you are asked to speak. Don't wing it. Don't
make it up as you go along. You will immediately find that when you
start using the sound bites you have created to talk about your
brand, people pay attention.

Years ago I came up with my own BrandScript sound bites to
describe StoryBrand itself. I noticed that when I repeated my sound
bites, people leaned in, and, to be honest, the interest wasn't always
welcome. If somebody sitting next to me on a plane asked what I
did for work, I'd answer with my sound bite and then have to spend
the rest of the flight looking at their website or rewriting the speech
they were going to deliver to whatever audience they were flying out
to address. My favorite encounter was with an Uber driver in
Baltimore. He'd picked me up at the Baltimore Airport and was
dropping me off at my client's headquarters only a few miles away. I
knew we wouldn't be in the car long, so when he asked what I did, I
decided to test the effectiveness of my sound bite: Sometimes
business leaders have great ideas and great products, but they don't
know how to talk about them to get people to pay attention. When
they can't come up with the sound bites they need to get their ideas
across, they call me. I help business leaders come up with the sound
bites they need to sell more products or get more votes.

The young man driving the car turned down his stereo, thought
for second, and said to me, "You are a very important person." I
laughed. I guess my sound bite worked, sort of. He then explained
he needed some messaging advice. I figured he had a side hustle
and wanted some advice to grow his business, but it turned out
something else was true: he needed messaging advice in order to
break up with his girlfriend. He literally pulled his car over at the
gates of a national security building where I was scheduled to meet
with a client and started talking about their relationship and how she
just didn't get him and that she'd been seeing this other guy. I'd
suddenly been dropped into an episode of The Bachelor. Men with
guns were watching us from behind the barricades, and so as he
talked I was torn. I didn't want to get shot, but I was deeply curious
about what she saw in this other guy. Anyway, I'm not a relationship


counselor, but I did give him a few lines. I say I gave him messaging
advice, but truthfully most of the short conversation consisted of me
saying things like, "Don't say that. Definitely don't say that." To be
honest, I think she might have been better off without him, but
that's hardly the point. The point is, when you use your sound bites
to talk about your brand, people should turn down the radio. People
should pull over. They should understand exactly why you and your
brand are so important.

What follows is a short, simple three-step process to get your

message across in a successful communication campaign.

Step One: Create Your StoryBrand BrandScript

If you've not been creating your BrandScript as you've read this
book, go back and start at the beginning. The process of creating a
BrandScript will clarify your offer not only to customers but to
yourself and your team. Don't think just because you know you
shouldn't play the hero that your audience will start seeing you as
their guide, for instance. They will see you as the guide only when
you use sound bites that demonstrate you empathize with their
problem and then use sound bites that demonstrate your
competency to help them solve their problem. Create your
StoryBrand BrandScript.

Step Two: Edit Your Sound Bites Until They Get the Reaction
You Want

If you've created the right sound bites, they should stop people
in their tracks. When you're done repeating your sound bites, people
should ask for your business card or, better, hand you their credit
card. If, on the other hand, people ask for clarification so they can
understand what you were trying to say, you don't quite have your
sound bites dialed in. The only question people should have after
you repeat your sound bite is, How can I buy it? In fact, if you've
used your call to action sound bite, they shouldn't even be asking
that question because you already answered it. In short, when you


use your sound bites, people should either want to place an order or
know somebody they think should place an order.

Consider your StoryBrand BrandScript a rough draft. The number
one problem I've encountered in coaching people through the
process is their initial sound bites are too elusive. You can't be vague
if you want your sound bites to work. Remember, don't be clever; be
clear.

Your StoryBrand BrandScript should be a work in progress until it
succeeds. If you aren't getting the reaction you want, keep refining
the sound bites until they lead to engagement and orders. This can
be a difficult process for some, especially if you really like the way
you've been talking about your brand. But the fact that you really
like something likely has more to do with the process you and your
team went through or how hard it was to come to an agreement or
the fact your granddaughter came up with your tagline or the idea
that your sound bite rhymes. Please, God, help us all. The only thing
you should be paying attention to when it comes to creating a
StoryBrand BrandScript is whether customers are leaning in and
placing orders. Keep evolving your sound bites until they get the
reaction you want.

Step Three: Repeat Your Sound Bites Until the Public Has
Them Memorized

Think of your communication campaign as an exercise in
memorization. Your job is to repeat your sound bites over and over
so many times that your customers can repeat them back to you.

Around my house we don't give out an allowance. Chores exist
because children are a critical part of the family, and we all have to
contribute to the family objectives, which, in our home, are all about
loving and respecting each other and the guests who enter our
home. That said, our daughter has a terrific opportunity to make
money, which is by memorizing poems. When I was young, I
memorized poetry and I credit my success as a writer to this
practice. Not only this, but the countless hours I spent repeating
Kipling's "The God's of the Copybook Headings" or William Blake's


"The Tyger" in my mind were the hours I wasn't going to the stupid
places I'd likely have taken my mind. And how do you memorize
something (or more accurately, help somebody else memorize
something)? You help them repeat whatever it is you want them to
memorize over and over in the exact same language. This is why the
alphabet song is so effective. It is essentially a marketing jingle that
has been helping people effectively memorize the alphabet for a
century or more. If you want to memorize a poem, you carry it
around on an index card and pull it out of your pocket to read it
whenever you're standing in line at a coffee shop or waiting for a
movie to begin.

When my wife's baby sister turned twelve, I gave her a binder
filled with ten classic poems. On the back side of each poem, I taped
a $100 bill in an envelope. I let her know that whenever she
memorized each of the ten poems, she could have and spend the
$100 associated with that poem. What did I really give her for her
birthday? I gave her the transformation that takes place when a
person meditates on some of the greatest words ever captured in
the English language. In other words, I gave her the opportunity for
personal transformation.

Your messaging campaign works like that binder, except instead
of your customer getting $100 every time they memorize your sound
bite, they pay you money in the form of an order.

If you want to use your StoryBrand BrandScript to grow your
business, take the three steps necessary to roll out a messaging
campaign: Create your BrandScript, edit your BrandScript, and then
repeat your BrandScript. After that, let's start dropping your refined
sound bites into effective marketing collateral.

In the next chapter we will begin putting your BrandScript to use
in the form of effective marketing and messaging collateral, starting
with your website.


CHAPTER 14

How to Get Your Website Right

I believe your website is important secondly because customers will
look at it and place orders but firstly because, by wireframing a good
website, you are organizing your talking points in such a way that
you can better understand your offer. If you spend a week, for
instance, slowly plotting out the sections of your website, making
sure to get the language right, and putting that language in the right
order, you are effectively clarifying how your offer is going to be
spelled out to the world. These sound bites and this language will
translate into conversations at cocktail parties, emails to clients, and
internal talking points delivered to your own team.

There have been many instances in which I came up with a new
product idea and then sat down to wireframe the landing page for
that product before I really understood my own offer. The exercise
of wireframing a website is worth the trouble.

To help you wireframe your website (get the text right and put it
in the right order), my team has created an artificial intelligence tool
that will help you move past the blank page. After you create your
StoryBrand BrandScript at StoryBrand.AI, simply press the "Create
my Messaging and Marketing Campaign" button and our AI prompts
will guide you through a series of questions that will inform the text
on your new website. The tool is being updated consistently so that
it works better and better. When you're done, you can easily hand
your wireframe to a designer who can lay it out for you. If you hire a


StoryBrand certified coach, they can further edit your text based on
best practices from their experience. The result should be a landing
page or website that gets terrific results.

Most of us don't have millions to spend on a marketing
campaign, but that's okay. These days we can get serious traction
just paying attention to the words we use and the places we can find
to repeat those words, and all of that starts with a clear and
effective website. People may hear about us through word of mouth
or social media, but when they do, they often visit our website to
learn more. When they get to our website, our controlling idea
should be spelled out more clearly than they've ever heard it before.
In the next chapter, I will give you a step-by-step plan to create a
StoryBrand Messaging and Marketing Campaign, including eight
specific sections to create for your landing page, but for now here
are five best practices to keep in mind when building your website.

FIVE BEST PRACTICES WHEN BUILDING YOUR
WEBSITE

1. An Offer Above the Fold

When people go to your website, the first thing they see are the
images and text above the fold. The term above the fold comes from
the newspaper industry and refers to the stories printed above
where the newspaper folds in half. On a website, the images and
text above the fold are the things you see and read before you start
scrolling down.

As I mentioned earlier, I like to think of the messages above the
fold as a first date, and then as you scroll you can treat the
messages further down the page as a second and third date. But as
we've talked about, the stuff you share on a first date should be
short, enticing, and exclusively customer-centric.

My wife was recently gifted an online membership to a cooking
school in Seattle. A friend sent it to her as a thank-you for some


work she'd done on their website. At first, Betsy was excited, until
she went to the site. On the main page of the site (before she
logged in), there was a beautiful picture of a carrot cake along with
some kind of inside joke about having something to eat while
watching Game of Thrones. We didn't get it. She scrolled down and
clicked on a video, hoping it would explain what kind of thing she'd
been given. Instead, the video featured a cartoon explanation of
how the company got started. Somebody named Joe met somebody
named Karen, who was friends with somebody named Todd, and
they all loved cooking!

It wasn't until my wife signed in and began exploring what the
site offered that she got excited. She came to bed that night telling
me about a certain kind of natural ingredient she could use to take
the color out of liquor so all her cocktails would look clear. I didn't
understand why this was important until she explained that the sage
from her garden would stand out more as it hung from the glass.
"Oh, the sage," I said. "They offer a service to help your sage stand
out."

"No," Betsy said. "It took me a couple of hours to figure it out,
but the whole subscription is about these three fun friends in Seattle
who are going to make me a pro in the kitchen!"

BINGO! Betsy said it. She said the very words that needed to be

printed above the fold on their website:

"WE WILL MAKE YOU A PRO IN THE KITCHEN!"

One short sentence (a controlling idea) would have helped us
understand what the business in question offered and even given us
words to use to help their business spread.

There is no telling how many customers that site is losing
because they are making their customers work so hard to
understand why anybody would need their service. My own wife,
who now loves the site, would have bounced had she not been given
a free pass.


The idea here is that customers need to know what's in it for
them right when they read the text. The text should be bold and the
statement should be short. It should be easy to read and not buried
under buttons and clutter. I recently went to the website for
Squarespace, and it simply said, "We Help You Make Beautiful
Websites." Perfect. They could have said a lot of things on their
website, but because they know to keep messages short and
relevant, they're making hundreds of millions of dollars.

Also, make sure that above the fold, the images and text you use

meet one of the following criteria:

THEY PROMISE AN ASPIRATIONAL IDENTITY.

By offering to make my wife a pro in the kitchen, the school
in Seattle could have let her know "what's in it for her" by
appealing to an aspirational identity. Can we help our
customers become competent in something? Will they be
different people after they've engaged us? Let's spell it out
clearly.
THEY PROMISE TO SOLVE A PROBLEM.

If you can fix a problem, tell us. Can you stop my cat from
clawing the furniture? My car from overheating? My hair from
thinning? Say it. We didn't go to your website to read about
how many company softball games you've won; we came here
to solve a problem.
THEY STATE EXACTLY WHAT THEY DO.

The easiest thing we can do on our website is state exactly
what we do. There's a shop down the street from us called
Local Honey, which would cause anybody to think they sell
local honey. They quickly overcame this confusion, though,
with a tagline that says, "We Sell Clothes. We Do Hair." Gotcha.
Local Honey sells clothes and does hair. I've now filed them
away in the Rolodex of my brain and will remember them
when I need a new hairstyle or new clothes.


Take a look at your website and make sure you have an obvious
offer above the fold. Some of our clients make the mistake of
spelling out their offer in the middle of a paragraph that starts out,
"We've been in business since 1979, committed to excellence and
caring about our customers . . ." That's all nice and sweet, but J. K.
Rowling didn't start her first Harry Potter novel with "My name is J.
K. Rowling and for a long time I've wanted to write a book . . ." The
fact that she always wanted to write a book wasn't part of the actual
Harry Potter story, and she was smart enough to know the
difference between her story and the story her readers wanted to
read. Instead, she got straight to the point. She hooked the reader.
She was smart, and we can be smart too. An offer above the fold is
a sure way to get a customer hooked on the story we're inviting
them into.

2. Obvious Calls to Action

If you're not sure what a call to action is, go back and read
chapter 8. It's important. For now, know that the whole point of your
website is to create a place where the direct call to action button
makes sense and is enticing. While we're in business to serve our
customers and better the world, we'll be out of business soon if
people don't click that "Buy Now" button. Let's not hide it.

There are two main places we want to place a direct call to
action. The first is at the top right of our website, and the second is
in the center of the main section that is above the fold. Your
customer's eye moves quickly in a Z pattern across your website, so
if the top left is your logo and perhaps tagline, your top right is a
"Buy Now" button, and the middle of the page is an offer followed
by another "Buy Now" button, then you've likely gotten through all
the noise in your customer's mind and they know exactly what to do
if they want help solving their problem.


For best results the "Buy Now" buttons should be a different
color from any other button on the site (preferably brighter so it
stands out), and all of your "Buy Now" buttons should look exactly
the same. I know this sounds like overkill, but remember, people
don't read websites, they scan them. You want that button to keep
showing up so nobody forgets where you want this relationship to
go. A person has to hear something (or read something) many times
before they process the information, so we want to repeat our main
call to action over and over.

Your call to action does not need to say "buy now" specifically,
but it should be a call to action that leads directly to an economic
transaction. Some popular calls to action include "buy now,"
"schedule a call," "schedule a meeting," "get yours now," and "add to
bag."

Your transitional call to action should also be obvious, but don't
let it distract from the direct call to action. I like featuring the
transitional call to action in a less-bright button next to the call to
action so the "Will you marry me?" and "Can we go out again?"


requests are right next to each other. Remember, if you aren't asking
people to place an order, they won't.

3. Images of Success

Words make up the majority of our messaging, but not all of it.
The images we use on our websites can either help communicate
our offer or confuse potential customers about where the story we
are inviting them into will take them. If people come to our website
and see pictures of our building, we're likely wasting some of their
mental bandwidth on meaningless images, unless, of course, we are
trying to sell our building. But even then, images of the building
aren't what I'd lead with. I'd save that for the second date. We
believe images of smiling, happy people who have had a pleasurable
experience (closed an open story loop) by engaging our brand
should be featured on our website.

Everybody wants to experience a better life in some way or
another, and while they may seem like a simple addition, images of
people smiling or looking satisfied speak to us. Images have the
power to show customers an emotional destination they can arrive
at when they choose to place an order.

We should also display images of our products, but if we can
feature those products in the hands of smiling people, our images
will have more power to convert browsers into buyers. Not
everybody needs to be smiling, of course; this wouldn't seem
authentic. But in general we need to visually display the health, wellbeing, and satisfaction customers can experience with our brand.
The easiest way to do this is by featuring images of happy
customers.


4. A Menu of Products, All Designed to Solve One Umbrella
Problem

Imagine visiting a restaurant and being told by the waiter that
they don't have a menu. When you ask what your options are, they
tell you, "We have really great protein and some terrific complex and
simple carbohydrates." You'd sit there baffled, wondering how you
are ever going to relieve your hunger. For a hundred years or more,
restaurants (and for that matter most businesses) have offered their
customers a menu to choose from, and your business is no different.
Make sure you've listed the products people can buy from you right
there on your website. And if you don't have a menu of products
because you're a service-based company, then start packing your
services and calling them something, thus turning those services into
a product. For instance, if you sell HVAC repair, offer a product called
"one-year maintenance package" that takes existing services,
packages them together, and charges a price for them.

If your menu of products is complicated (for instance, if you have
some B2B products and some B2C products), don't worry. A
common challenge for many businesses is that they need to
communicate simply about what they do, but they've diversified their
revenue streams so widely that they're having trouble knowing how
to frame their menu of products so that it's clear what main problem
their brand solves for their customer. If this is your struggle, you're
hardly alone. We had a client a couple of years ago who had two
main products: a two-day personalized life-planning process for
individuals, and a two-day strategic operations planning session for
teams of executive leaders. Sounds simple enough, except the
company didn't really make money off either product; instead, they
made money training and certifying facilitators. The challenge, then,
was to increase demand for each product so more people would
want to become facilitators. This means they had to drive traffic to
three different products: the life-planning product, the strat-ops
product, and the actual money-making facilitator certification.

If this company sounds like yours (that is, your product offering
is complicated), the first challenge is to find an overall umbrella


message that unifies your various streams. For our friends delivering
life-planning and strat-ops facilitation, we chose the need people
have for a customized plan. Above the fold on their website, we
recommended the text "The Key to Success Is a Customized Plan"
over an image of a facilitator mapping out a plan on a whiteboard
for a satisfied client. As potential customers scrolled down the page,
they would see two sections to choose from: personal life plans and
corporate strategy plans. Each of these buttons led to new pages
with messages filtered by two different BrandScripts. Customers
were able to schedule facilitations on either page. The key to
growing the business, though, was a button at the top and bottom
of each and every page that said, "Become a Trained Facilitator."

We may think our menu of products is too diverse to
communicate our offering clearly, but it probably isn't. Certainly
there are examples where various brands within an umbrella
company need to be split up and marketed separately, but in most
cases we can find an umbrella theme to unite them all. Once we
have an umbrella message, we can separate the divisions using
different web pages and different BrandScripts. The key is clarity.
When we break down our divisions clearly so people can understand
our overall offer followed by the menu of products that represents
the various ways we can solve our customers' problems, customers
will be able to choose their own adventure without being confused.

5. Very Few Words

People don't read websites anymore; they scan them. If there is
a paragraph above the fold on your website, it's being passed over, I
promise. Around the office we use the phrase "write it in Morse
code" when we need marketing copy. By "Morse code" we mean
copy that is brief, punchy, and relevant to our customers. Think
again about our caveman sitting in his cave. "You sell cupcakes.
Cupcakes good. Me want eat cupcake. Me like pink one and must go
to bakery now." Most of us err too far in the opposite direction of
simple and brief: we use too much text.


If you're promoting a school, why say, "As parents ourselves, we
understand what it feels like to want the best for our children. That's
why we've created a school where parents work closely with
teachers through every step of their child's education journey," when
you could just say, "Weekly Conference Calls with Your Child's
Teacher" as a bullet point along with five other great differentiators
about your school?

As customers scroll down your page, it's okay to use more words
than you are using in your header, but by more I really mean a few
more sentences here and there. Some of the most effective websites
I've reviewed have used ten sentences or less on the entire page.
That's the equivalent of about ten tweets or one press conference
with Bill Belichick.

If you do want to use a long section of text to explain something
(we do it on our site, in fact), just place a little "read more" link at
the end of the first or second sentence in a section of the website
down the page a bit so people can expand the text if they like. That
way you aren't bombarding customers with too much text.

As an experiment, let's see if you can cut half the words out of
your current website. Can you replace some of your text with
images? Can you reduce whole paragraphs into three or four bullet
points? Can you summarize sentences into snappy sound bites? If
so, make those changes soon. The rule is this: the fewer words you
use, the more likely it is that people will read them.

STAY ON SCRIPT

There are more than five things to consider when building your
website, of course, but if you added all the rest of the tips and
strategies together, they wouldn't make as big of a difference as
getting these five things right.

If you think about your StoryBrand BrandScript as a drum kit,
think of your website as a drum solo. There shouldn't be a single


word, image, or idea shared on your website that doesn't come from
the sound bites generated by your BrandScript. The words you use
in your marketing and messaging don't have to be the exact text you
have on your BrandScript, but the ideas should be the same. If
you're including messages on your website that don't come from one
of the categories of the SB7 framework, your customers will hear
only noise.

The big idea is to stay on script. People will engage your brand
only after they hear, understand, and perhaps even unknowingly
memorize your sound bites. If you want your words to spread, keep
your sound bites short and relevant, then repeat them everywhere
you can. If you do, you will engage more customers, and those
customers will place more orders. Why? Not because your message
is clever or even coercive but because you've finally made it clear.

When you hit the "Create a StoryBrand Messaging and Marketing
Campaign" button on your StoryBrand BrandScript at StoryBrand.AI,
you will be asked several questions that will inform the creation a
robust report including a tagline, one-liner, wireframed website, lead
generator, follow-up emails, sales script, narrative scripts for
YouTube videos and social media, podcast prompts and topics,
bonus ideas to create urgency, upsell product ideas, plug-and-play
social media posts, plus industry trends specific to your industry. The
website wireframe our artificial intelligence will create includes a few
more sections than I've included in this chapter, and you can edit
your wireframe so it reads exactly how you want. Your wireframe
can then be easily handed to a StoryBrand certified coach to be
designed and executed so that it generates (or improves) sales.


CHAPTER 15

HOW TO EXECUTE A STORYBRAND
MESSAGING AND MARKETING
CAMPAIGN

Transform your marketing by implementing your
clear message in a marketing system that works

So where do we go from here? Now that we have a StoryBrand
BrandScript, how can we use these powerful sound bites so they
have the greatest possible impact on our bottom line?

The StoryBrand Messaging and Marketing Campaign is a proven,
simple marketing system
is basically a
communication campaign you roll out so that customers hear about
your brand, begin to trust that you can solve their problems, and
then place orders.

that works. This

We have certified nearly a thousand StoryBrand coaches in the
last ten years, each of whom understands the framework and is
practiced in putting your sound bites in the right places within an
effective messaging and marketing campaign. In the hundreds of
meetings we've had with our coaches, they've shared with us what
works and what doesn't. This chapter is a summation of their most
effective practices. You can either create your messaging and
marketing campaign on your own or hire a coach to create some or
at
from
all

our Coach

campaign

directory

your

of


MarketingMadeSimple.com. What follows is a step-by-step execution
plan. Again, much of your rough draft can be done using the
StoryBrand Brain at StoryBrand.AI, but refining your work, designing
your messaging and marketing campaign, and hooking it up to a
CRM can all be done either by yourself or by one of our coaches.

YOUR STEP-BY-STEP PLAN

Every step you take should result in greater customer engagement
and more sales. You don't have to create your entire messaging and
marketing campaign all at once. That said, the more you create, the
more customers will encounter and understand your offer.

Also, once you're done creating your StoryBrand Messaging and
Marketing Campaign, create another one. My business has a dozen
or more messaging and marketing campaigns operating, and each of
them brings in leads that help us sell various products, from
certifications to workshops to masterminds and private strategy
sessions. Every morning I open my dashboard to see how many
leads came in for each product, and I can follow those leads down a
pipeline to see how many are converting to sales. In other words,
I'm able to predict revenue long before a customer purchases our
products, which is helpful knowledge to have when trying to grow a
small business. I want the same for you.

If you are going to create your messaging and marketing
campaigns plan yourself, what follows can serve as your complete
roadmap. If you have a marketing director on your team, simply
hand them this book and give them the task of completing the
BrandScript assignment (the previous chapters in this book) and the
StoryBrand Messaging and Marketing Campaign l that makes up this
final chapter.

The reason a StoryBrand Messaging and Marketing Campaign
works so well is because it guides customers through the three
stages of relationships: curiosity, enlightenment, and commitment.


When a potential customer hears your elevator pitch, they get
curious. The reason they get curious is because they suspect you
have a product or service that can help them. It's only when a
customer gets curious that they want to know more, so the first job
of a good messaging and marketing campaign is to make them
curious. After a customer gets curious, they begin to read a little
more about your product to "enlighten" themselves about whether
your product is right for them. In this enlightenment stage,
depending on how expensive or complicated the product adoption
might be, a customer may look around for reviews, read about your
product, ask their friends if they've used the product, or search
YouTube for videos about your product. If you have good
"enlightenment" material, customers will then move on to the third
phase of their relationship with you, and that is the "commitment"
phase in which they become willing to place an order.

Our goal as marketers is to create terrific curiosity collateral--that
is, sound bites on landing pages and digital ads and webinars and
the like that will pique a potential customer's curiosity. After we
create our curiosity collateral, we need to create enlightenment
include downloadable PDFs, webinars,
collateral, which may
breakout session presentations, automated email sequences,
YouTube videos, and other long-form marketing collateral. Once
we've created our enlightenment collateral, we need to make sure
our calls to action are clear, including sales emails, countdown
timers, special offers, and so on.

The job of a messaging and marketing campaign is to pique our
customers' curiosity; earn their trust with consistent, valuable
information; and then ask for the commitment by challenging them
to make a purchase. If you follow the step-by-step instructions in
this chapter, your StoryBrand Messaging and Marketing Campaign
will do the job perfectly.

With that, let's get started with the first step.


STEP ONE: GENERATE A STORYBRAND
BRANDSCRIPT

It goes without saying that your StoryBrand BrandScript is the
foundation of your messaging and marketing campaign. Until you
get the words right, your marketing will fail. To get the best results,
create a BrandScript for every major marketing initiative. You can do
this by reading this book, listening to the audiobook, or, if you want
to have a little fun, listen to StoryBrand Radio Theater Presents: Pete
and Joe Save Their Mother's Company on Audible or
Youtube.com/@storybrand. The radio theater version of Building a
StoryBrand is a fictional story that teaches the framework, followed
by me explaining a step-by-step process you can go through to
create a BrandScript. The radio theater version of Building a
StoryBrand was designed to be a quick and effective way for you (or
your team) to understand and create a BrandScript.

Once you've created your BrandScript, move on to step two.

STEP TWO: CREATE A ONE-LINER

Most people turn customers off the second they start talking about
their business. When somebody asks what we do and we answer
with something like, "Well, it's complicated" or "You see, fifty years
ago my grandfather started our company . . ." we've lost the
customer's interest immediately. Instead of rambling, though,
imagine memorizing a single statement you could recite to intrigue
and even engage a potential customer. Imagine this statement being
so powerful it causes people to ask for your business card or, better,
inquire about how they could place an order.

A one-liner is a better way to answer the question, "What do you
do?" It's more than a slogan or tagline; it's a single statement that
helps people realize why they need your products or services.
