# Building_a_StoryBrand_Donald_Miller


PRAISE FOR BUILDING A STORYBRAND

"This is a seminal book built around an idea that will clarify, energize, and
transform your business. Donald Miller offers a specific, detailed, and useful way
to change the way you talk about the work you care about."

--SETH GODIN, AUTHOR OF ALL MARKETERS ARE LIARS

"StoryBrand is the best thing to happen to my conversions in a long time. After
rewriting one webinar registration page using the StoryBrand framework, the page
converted at 60 percent to a cold ads audience. That's UNHEARD of! I especially
love that StoryBrand always puts the customer first, which aligns with my
company's core values. (And it doesn't hurt that sales have never been better!) We
now use the StoryBrand framework for every sales page . . . home page . . .
email . . . anywhere in my business that we write copy."

--AMY PORTERFIELD, NEW YORK TIMES BESTSELLING AUTHOR OF TWO
WEEKS NOTICE AND HOST OF ONLINE MARKETING MADE EASY PODCAST

"Donald Miller ought to be working with your company just like he worked with
ours. We changed our website after learning his framework and the results were
fantastic. We noticed a difference right away. The StoryBrand framework works--
and we are implementing it companywide. Read this book!"

--KEN BLANCHARD, CHIEF SPIRITUAL OFFICER OF THE KEN BLANCHARD
COMPANIES AND COAUTHOR OF THE NEW ONE MINUTE MANAGER®

"Donald Miller will teach you a lot more than how to sell products; he will teach
you how to transform the lives of your customers. Your customers need you to
play a role in their lives, and this book will teach you how. If you want your
business to grow, read this book."

--JOHN C. MAXWELL, #1 NEW YORK TIMES BESTSELLING AUTHOR

is the most

"This
important business/marketing book of the year. All
communicators know the power of story. Donald Miller has captured the process to
make your marketing pierce the white noise of the most overserved marketing
generation in history. You have to read this book!"

--DAVE RAMSEY, #1 NEW YORK TIMES BESTSELLING AUTHOR

"Donald Miller reminds us that all good messaging begins and ends with empathy.
He knows that if you want to be seen, heard, and understood, the first step is to


listen. Get this book if you want to connect with people in a profound way."

--BILL HASLAM, FORTY-NINTH GOVERNOR OF TENNESSEE

"If you like making money, read this book. The StoryBrand framework will help
you create sales messages that people listen and respond to. We use it all the
time, and it works!"

--RYAN DEISS, FOUNDER AND CEO OF DIGITALMARKETER

"Building a StoryBrand isn't just about clarifying your message, it's about clarifying
your mission. Playing the role of Guide so you can help Heroes win in their own
story must be a foundational drive if we expect to transform our customers' lives.
In this book, Don Miller shows us all how to find incredible meaning in our work by
doing exactly that."

--WILL GUIDARA, AUTHOR OF UNREASONABLE HOSPITALITY

"I've been using Don Miller's StoryBrand framework in my business for years now.
It's the single best marketing tool I know. We use it on every product we launch.
I've had Don personally teach my company and clients, and I recommend him to
everyone. Now, all these revolutionary insights are easily accessible between these
covers."

--MICHAEL HYATT, NEW YORK TIMES BESTSELLING AUTHOR AND
FOUNDER, FULL FOCUS

"Building a StoryBrand is your guide to cutting through the noise and making your
message resonate. Donald Miller's wisdom shows us how to draw customers into a
story where they're the heroes of their own transformation. This isn't just a book--
it's an inspiring journey that'll ignite your passion and elevate your impact!"

- JENNA KUTCHER, HOST OF THE GOAL DIGGER PODCAST AND NEW YORK
TIMES BESTSELLING AUTHOR OF HOW ARE YOU, REALLY?





COPYRIGHT

Building a StoryBrand 2.0

© 2025 by Donald Miller

All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means--electronic,
mechanical, photocopy, recording, scanning, or other--except for brief quotations
in critical reviews or articles, without the prior written permission of the publisher.

Published by HarperCollins Leadership, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.

The author is represented by Ambassador Literary Agency, Nashville, TN.

Graphics designed by Kyle Reid.

ISBN 978-1-4002-4887-2 (HC)
ISBN 978-1-4002-4888-9 (eBook)
ISBN 978-1-4002-5130-8 (IE)

Epub Edition DECEMBER 2024 9781400248889

Library of Congress Control Number: 2017937432


Information about External Hyperlinks in this ebook

Please note that the endnotes in this ebook may contain hyperlinks
to external websites as part of bibliographic citations. These
hyperlinks have not been activated by the publisher, who cannot
verify the accuracy of these links beyond the date of publication


Ebook Instructions

In this ebook edition, please use your device's note-taking function
to record your thoughts wherever you see the bracketed instructions
[Your Notes]. Use your device's highlighting function to record your
response whenever you are asked to checkmark, circle, underline, or
otherwise indicate your answer(s).


This book is dedicated to:
The team at Coach Builder, Business Made Simple,
and StoryBrand. It's been the greatest pleasure of
my career to build a business with you.
You are living proof that when friends sacrifice
together for a common good, they can become
family.


CONTENTS

Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Want Your Entire Team to Understand the StoryBrand Framework?
Note from the Author on This Updated Edition
Introduction

Section 1: Why Most Marketing Is A Money Pit

1. The Key to Being Seen, Heard, and Understood

2. The Secret Weapon That Will Grow Your Business

3. The Simple SB7 Framework

Section 2: Building Your StoryBrand

4. A Character

5. Has a Problem

6. And Meets a Guide

7. Who Gives Them a Plan

8. And Calls Them to Action

9. That Helps Them Avoid Failure

10. And Ends in a Success

11. People Want Your Brand to Participate in Their Transformation

12. Define Your Controlling Idea

Section 3: Executing Your StoryBrand Messaging and Marketing Campaign

13. How to Execute a Flawless StoryBrand Communication Campaign

14. How to Get Your Website Right

15. How to Execute a StoryBrand Messaging and Marketing Campaign


Afterword
Acknowledgments
About the Author
Praise for the StoryBrand Framework
StoryBrand Resources
Notes


WANT YOUR ENTIRE TEAM TO
UNDERSTAND THE STORYBRAND
FRAMEWORK?

We noticed many business leaders wanted their teams to better
understand the StoryBrand framework and were looking for a tool to
easily explain it to them. To help, we created a 1920s-style radio
theater production that teaches the framework by telling a story. The
story is about two brothers challenged with saving their mother's
board game company. Can the brothers save the company? How
does StoryBrand help them? Will the brothers' friendship survive the
challenge? You can find out by listening to StoryBrand Radio Theater
Presents: Pete and Joe Save Their Mother's Company, available now,
on Audible or Youtube.com/@storybrand.


NOTE FROM THE AUTHOR ON THIS
UPDATED EDITION

Since its initial publication in 2017, Building a StoryBrand has sold
more than one million copies. The book has now helped small and
large businesses alike create sound bites they can repeat to grow
their businesses, and the results have been better than good. I
would safely estimate this book has helped companies realize billions
in increased revenue and millions of new customers. The framework
has been utilized to sell everything from plungers to American
foreign policy to airplane engines.

In this updated edition, I hope I have made the book even more
helpful. To do this, I've nearly doubled the examples and stories of
how brands have used the framework to endear and engage
customers. Nearly a million businesses have used the free online
BrandScript tool that comes with this book, and we've worked hard
to improve the process and results.

For the rerelease of Building a StoryBrand, we've taken the
cumulative content I've personally developed--including all my
teachings, books, YouTube videos, podcasts, and recorded coaching
sessions--to inform our own StoryBrand Brain that will create a
custom StoryBrand Messaging and Marketing Campaign for your
brand or product.

We believe we've created the greatest artificial intelligence tool
for messaging and marketing on the internet. After you respond to
our prompts and answer about five minutes' worth of questions, the
StoryBrand Brain will generate a robust report, including a tagline,


one-liner, wireframed website, lead generator, follow-up emails, sales
script, narrative scripts for YouTube videos and social media, podcast
prompts and topics, bonus ideas to create urgency, upsell product
ideas, plug-and-play social media posts, plus industry trends specific
to your industry.

This new edition of Building a StoryBrand will be helpful whether
you are starting a brand, growing an existing brand, positioning
yourself as a leader, are a sales rep for an existing company, or even
growing a nonprofit. The book will help you do these things by
helping you discover the words you can use on websites, marketing
and messaging campaigns, keynote presentations, proposals, sales
letters, sales conversations, and even sound bites you can repeat in
casual conversation.

Ultimately, your brand will grow faster when you use the right
words. I wrote (and rewrote) this book to help you find those words.
To create your StoryBrand Messaging and Marketing Campaign,

go to StoryBrand.AI.

I also hope this new version of the book is fun to read. After
you've created your sound bites, my hope is that many people will
enjoy the story you invite them into.


INTRODUCTION

This is not a book about telling your company's story. A book like
that would be a waste of time. Customers generally don't care about
your story; they care about their own.

Your customer should be the hero of the story, not your brand.
the secret every phenomenally successful business

is
This
understands.

What follows is a seven-part framework that will change the way

you talk about your business and perhaps the way you do business.

Each year we help more than ten thousand businesses stop
wasting money on marketing and grow their company by helping
them clarify their message. This framework will work for you,
regardless of your industry.

To get the most out of this book, I encourage you to do three

things:

1. Read the book and understand the SB7 framework.
2. Filter your message through the framework to create a

StoryBrand Messaging and Marketing Campaign.

3. Execute your new marketing and messaging strategy to see

results.

Marketing has changed. Businesses that invite their customers

into a heroic story will grow. Businesses that don't will be forgotten.

May we all be richly rewarded for putting our customers' stories

above our own.


SECTION 1

WHY MOST MARKETING
IS A MONEY PIT


CHAPTER 1

THE KEY TO BEING SEEN, HEARD,
AND UNDERSTOOD

Most companies waste enormous amounts of money on marketing.
We all know how mind-numbing it is to spend precious dollars on a
new marketing effort that gets no results. When we see the reports,
we wonder what went wrong or, worse, whether our product is really
as good as we thought it was.

But what if the problem wasn't the product? What if the problem

was the way we talked about the product?

The problem is simple: the graphic artists and designers we're
hiring to build our websites and ad campaigns have degrees in
design and know everything about Photoshop, but they haven't read
a single book about writing good sales copy. How many of them
know how to clarify your message so customers listen? Even worse,
these companies will gladly take your money regardless of whether
you see positive results.

The fact is, pretty websites don't sell things. Words sell things.

And if we haven't clarified our message, our customers won't listen.

If we pay a lot of money to a design agency without first
clarifying our message, we might as well be holding a bullhorn up to
a monkey. The only thing a potential customer will hear is noise.

Still, clarifying our message isn't easy. I had one client say that
when he tried to do so, he felt like he was inside the bottle trying to
read the label. I understand. Before I started StoryBrand I was a


writer and spent thousands of hours staring at a blank computer
screen, wondering what to say. That soul-wrenching frustration led
me to create a communication framework based on the proven
power of story, and I swear it was like discovering a secret formula.
Using the framework, my writing got easier and better. I ended up
selling millions of books. After using the framework to create clear
messages in my books, I used it to filter the marketing collateral in
my own small company. Once we got clear, we doubled in revenue
for four consecutive years. I now teach that framework to more than
ten thousand businesses each year.

Once they get their message straight, our clients create quality
websites, incredible keynote presentations, emails that get opened,
advertising that gets clicked, social media posts that get noticed, and
sales letters that people respond to. Why? Because nobody will listen
to you if your message isn't clear, no matter how expensive your
marketing collateral may be.

At StoryBrand we've had clients double, triple, and even
quadruple their revenue after they got one thing straight--their
message.

The StoryBrand framework has been just as effective for billiondollar brands as it has for mom-and-pop businesses. It is just as
powerful for American corporations as it has been for those in Japan
and Africa. Why? Because the human brain, no matter what region
of the world it comes from, is drawn toward clarity and away from
confusion.

The reality is we aren't just in a race to get our products to
market; we're also in a race to communicate why our customers
need those products. Even if we have the best product in the
marketplace, we'll lose to an inferior product if our competitor's offer
is communicated more clearly.

So what's your message? Can you say it easily? Is it simple,
relevant, and relatable? Can your entire team repeat your company's
message in such a way that it is compelling? Can you and your team
easily remember the talking points they can use to describe what the
company offers and why every potential customer should buy it?


How many sales are we missing out on because customers can't
figure out what our offer is within five seconds of visiting our
website, seeing our ads, reading our lead generators, or opening our
emails?

WHY SO MANY BUSINESSES FAIL

To find out why so many marketing and branding attempts fail, I
called my friend Mike McHargue. Mike, often called "Science Mike"
because he hosts a successful podcast called Ask Science Mike,
spent fifteen years using science-based methodologies to help
companies figure out how their customers think, specifically in the
tech space. Sadly, he left advertising when a client asked him to
create an algorithm predicting the associated buying habits of
people with diabetes. Translation: they wanted him to sell junk food
to diabetics. Mike refused and left the industry. He's a good man. I
called, though, because he still has incredible insight as to how
marketing, story, and behavior all blend together.

At my request, Mike flew to Nashville to attend one of our
workshops. After two days learning the StoryBrand 7-Part framework
(hereafter called the SB7 framework), we sat on my back porch and
I grilled him with questions. Why does this formula work? What's
happening in the brains of consumers as they encounter a message
filtered through this formula? What's the science behind why brands
like Apple and Coke, who intuitively use this formula, dominate the
marketplace?

"There's a reason most marketing collateral doesn't work," Mike
said, putting his feet up on the coffee table. "Their marketing is too
complicated. The brain has to work too hard to process the
information. The more simple and predictable the communication,
the easier it is for the brain to digest. Story helps because it is a
sense-making mechanism. Essentially, story formulas put everything


in order so the brain doesn't have to work to understand what's
going on."

Mike went on to explain that, among the million things the brain
is good at, the overriding function of the brain is to help an
individual survive and thrive. Everything the human brain does, all
day, involves helping that person (and the people that person cares
about) get ahead in life.

Mike asked if I remembered that old pyramid we learned about in
high school, Abraham Maslow's hierarchy of needs. First, he
reminded me, the brain is tasked with setting up a system in which
we can eat and drink and survive physically. In our modern, firstworld economy, this means having a job and a dependable income.
Then the brain is concerned with safety, which might entail having a
roof over our heads and a sense of well-being and power that keeps
us from being vulnerable. After food and shelter are taken care of,
our brains start thinking about our relationships, which entail
everything from reproducing in a sexual relationship, to being
nurtured in a romantic relationship, to creating friendships (a tribe)
who will stick by us in case of any social threats. Finally, the brain
begins to concern itself with greater psychological, physiological, or
even spiritual needs that give us a sense of meaning.

What Mike helped me understand is that, without us knowing it,
human beings are constantly scanning their environment (even
advertising) for information that is going to help them meet their
primitive need to survive. This means that when we ramble on and
on about how we have the biggest manufacturing plant on the West
Coast, our customers don't care. Why? Because that information
isn't helping them eat, drink, find a mate, fall in love, build a tribe,
experience a deeper sense of meaning, or stockpile weapons in case
barbarians start coming over the hill behind their cul-de-sac.

So what do customers do when we blast a bunch of noise at

them? They ignore us.

And so right there on my back porch, Mike defined two critical
mistakes brands make when they talk about their products and
services.


Mistake Number One

The first mistake brands make is failing to focus on the aspects of

their offer that will help people survive and thrive.

All great stories are about survival--either physical, emotional,
relational, or spiritual. A story about anything else won't captivate an
audience. Nobody's interested. This means that if we position our
products and services as anything but an aid in helping people
survive, thrive, be accepted, find love, achieve an aspirational
identity, or bond with a tribe that will defend them physically and
socially, good luck selling anything to anybody. Surviving and thriving
are the primary concerns of every healthy human being on the
planet. We can take that truth to the bank. Or to bankruptcy court,
should we choose to ignore it as an undeniable fact.

Mike said our brains are constantly sorting through information,
so we discard millions of unnecessary facts every day. If we were to
spend an hour in a giant ballroom, our brains would never think to
count how many chairs are in the room. Meanwhile, we would
always know where the exits are. Why? Because our brains don't
need to know how many chairs there are in the room to survive, but
knowing where the exits are would be helpful in case of a fire.

Mike helped me understand that, without knowing it, the
subconscious is always categorizing and organizing information, and,
as it relates to growing our businesses, when we talk publicly about
our company's random backstory or internal goals, or worse, when
we are vague and confusing about what problem we solve for the
customer, we're positioning ourselves as the chairs, not the exits. In
other words, the way most of us talk about our brand and our
products causes the very customers we want to engage us to ignore
us.

"The reason many businesses--and for that matter, leaders, are
ignored," Mike continued, "is because processing information
demands that the brain burn calories. And the burning of too many
calories processing information we do not need in order to survive
acts against the brain's primary job: to help us survive and thrive."


The point is this: most of our messaging collateral is elusive,
confusing, or unrelatable, which means that God has literally
designed our customers' brains to ignore us.

Mistake Number Two

The second mistake brands make when they talk about their
products and services is they require their customers to burn too
many calories in order to understand their offer.

When having to process too much seemingly unnecessary
information, people begin to ignore the source of that information in
an effort to conserve calories. In other words, there's a survival
mechanism within our customers' brains that is designed to tune us
out should we ever start confusing them.

Imagine every time we talk about our products to potential
customers, they have to start running on a treadmill. Literally, they
have to jog the whole time we're talking. How long do you think
they're going to pay attention? Not long. And yet this is very close to
what's actually happening in our customers' minds as we talk to
them about our products. When we start our elevator pitch or
keynote address, or when somebody visits our website, they're
burning calories to process the information we're sharing. And if we
don't say something (and say something quickly) they can use to
survive or thrive, they will tune us out.

These two realities--that people are looking for brands that can
help them survive and thrive, and that communication must be so
simple that a person doesn't have to burn too many mental calories
to understand what we're saying--explain why the SB7 framework
has helped so many businesses grow their revenue and influence.
The key is to create a message that reveals how we help our
customers survive and to do so in language so simple that they
understand the message without having to, burn too many calories.

Not long ago, I helped a major pet-supply brand nearly double
their revenue by adding only three words to their packaging and
signage: kids love aquariums. Spectrum brands had been wildly
successful in the home aquarium and fish supply market at American


pet stores for years; however, they were having trouble selling
aquariums to anybody other than fish enthusiasts and hobbyists.
Despite their efforts, they were not able to move into the family
market. As we spoke, I recalled that my young daughter loved
aquariums. In fact, on a recent trip to London she asked me to stand
in front of the aquarium in the lobby for long periods of time until
we could find Nemo! She loved the aquarium so much I actually took
a video of it with my phone so she could watch the video before we
read bed-time stories. When I recommended that Spectrum simply
add three words to their packaging, Kids Love Aquariums, they
weren't convinced the answer could be that easy. But think about it:
if parents are walking into a pet store looking for something their
kids will love (part of the human survival dynamic involves building a
family tribe, creating family bonds, and passing love and nurture to
our children), then the "Kids Love Aquariums" tagline would position
their products as the very solution parents are looking for.

The result of the three-word campaign in a test market? A 99
percent increase in overall sales. The results were so good that
Spectrum is currently rolling out the messaging strategy nationwide.
The truth is, you don't need an expensive ad campaign or a
beautiful style guide to grow your business; you just need a few
sound bites customers immediately understand so they quickly
realize you have a solution to their problem.

But what kind of sound bites should we use, and how do we

come up with them?

STORY TO THE RESCUE

Story is the most powerful tool we can use to organize and
communicate our offering so people don't have to burn many
calories to understand us. I discovered this during my years as a
memoirist. My first book, which I wrote before understanding story
and story structure, sold only about ten thousand copies. But after


studying and incorporating a story-based formula, my next book
ended up on the New York Times bestseller list for nearly a year.
Story, it turns out, is a sense-making device readers can follow
without having to burn very many calories.

What is a story? A story identifies an ambition or objective the
hero wants to accomplish, then defines the challenges that are
keeping the hero from getting what they want, then provides a plan
to help the hero conquer those challenges so they can survive and
thrive. It's an age-old formula, but it works. And it doesn't only work
to entertain us; it works to get our attention. Here, then, is the
thesis of this book: when we define the elements of a story as it
relates to our brand, we create a mental map customers can follow
to engage our products and services.

In the years since the first edition of this book came out,
hundreds of thousands of business owners have used the framework
to invite their customers into a story, and the results are compelling.
Thousands of business owners and leaders have told us that, after
simply clarifying their message, sales have grown exponentially.

Still, when I talk about story to business leaders, they
immediately put me in a category with artists, thinking I want to
introduce them to something fanciful. But that's not what I'm talking
about. I'm talking about a concrete formula we can use to garner
attention from otherwise distracted customers. I'm talking about
practical steps we can take to make sure people see us, hear us, and
understand exactly why they simply must engage our products.

THE FORMULA FOR CLEAR COMMUNICATION

Formulas are simply the summation of best practices, and the reason
we like them is because they work. We've been given great formulas
for management, like Ken Blanchard's Situational Leadership, and
ones we can use in manufacturing like Six Sigma and Lean
Manufacturing. But what about one for communication? Why don't


we have a formula we can use to effectively explain what our
products offer the world?

The StoryBrand framework is that formula. We know it works
because some variation of this formula has been actively used over
thousands of years to get people to pay attention to plays, books,
and more recently movies and television shows. Talk about a
summation of best practices. Story formulas have been tested by the
entertainment industry since antiquity. When it comes to grabbing
people's attention, this proven formula will be your most powerful
ally.

I will warn you though. Story formulas are just that--they are
formulaic. Once you know the formulas screenwriters and novelists
use to hook a reader, you can predict the path most stories will take.
I've learned these formulas so well that my wife hates going to
movies with me because she knows at some point I'm going to
elbow her and whisper something like, "That guy's going to die in
thirty-one minutes."

Story formulas reveal a well-worn path in the human brain, and if
we want to stay in business, we need to position our products along
a path they are designed to follow.

The good news is these formulas can work just as well at

growing your business as they do at entertaining an audience.

THE KEY IS CLARITY

The narrative coming out of a company (and, for that matter, being
spoken inside a company) must be clear. In a story, audiences must
always know who the hero is, what the hero wants, who the hero
has to defeat to get what they want, what tragic thing will happen if
they don't win, and what wonderful thing will happen if they do. If
an audience can't answer these basic questions, they'll check out
and the movie will lose millions at the box office. And if a
screenwriter breaks these rules, they'll likely never work again.


The same is true for the brand you represent. Our customers
have burning questions, and if we aren't answering those questions,
they'll move on to another brand. For example, if we haven't
identified what our customer wants, what problem we are helping
them solve, and what life will look like after they engage our
products and services, we can forget about thriving in the
marketplace. Most businesses fail to create these sound bites, and
worse, won't stop using confusing or unrelatable language. Whether
we're writing a story or attempting to sell products, our message
must be clear. Always.

In fact, at StoryBrand we have a mantra: "If you confuse, you'll

lose."

BUSINESS HAS AN ENEMY

Clarity is important because your business has a fierce, insidious
enemy that, if not identified and combated, will contort what you
offer the world into an unrecognizable mess. The enemy I'm talking
about is noise.

Noise has killed more ideas, products, and services than taxes,
recessions, lawsuits, climbing interest rates, and even inferior
product design. I'm not talking about the noise inside our business;
I'm talking about the noise we create as a business. What we often
call marketing is really just clutter and confusion sprayed all over our
websites, emails, and commercials. And it's costing us millions.

Years ago, a StoryBrand client who attended one of our
workshops pushed back. "I don't think this will work for me," he
said. "My business is too diverse to reduce down to a series of sound
bites." I asked him to explain.

"I have an industrial painting company with three different
revenue streams. In one division we powder coat auto parts. In
another we apply sealant to concrete, and in another we have a
sterilized painting process used specifically in hospitals."


His business was diverse, but nothing so complex that it couldn't
be simplified so more people would hire him. I asked if I could put
his website on the giant television screen so the entire workshop
could see it. His website was thoughtful, but it didn't make a great
deal of sense from an outside perspective (which is how every
customer views your business).

The man had hired a fine arts painter to create a painting of his
building (was he selling a building?), and at first glance it looked like
the website for an Italian restaurant. The first question I had when I
went to the website was, "Do you serve free breadsticks?" There
were a thousand links ranging from contact information to FAQs to a
timeline of the company's history. There were even links to the
nonprofits the business supported. It was as though he was using
his website to answer a hundred questions, none of which his
customers were asking.

I asked the class to raise their hands if they thought my new
friend's business would grow if he wiped the website clean and
simply featured an image of a guy in a white lab coat painting
something next to text that read, "We Paint All Kinds of S#*%,"
accompanied by a button in the middle of the page that said, "Get a
Quote."

The entire class raised their hands in agreement that the new,

simple message would increase customer engagement.

Of course his business would grow with a more simple message.
Why? Because he would have finally stopped forcing clients to burn
calories thinking about his nonprofit work and his story and his job
opportunities and instead offered the one thing that would solve his
customers' problems: a good painter.

What we think we are saying to our customers and what our
customers actually hear are two different things. And customers
make buying decisions based not on what we say but on what they
hear.

STOP SAYING THAT


All experienced writers know the key to great writing isn't in what
they say; it's in what they don't say. For professional writers there is
a general rule: the more we cut out, the better the screenplay or
book. Great communicators know the power of keeping it simple--
that is, if they want people to pay attention and remember anything
they say. But clarifying our message isn't easy. The mathematician
and philosopher Blaise Pascal is often credited with sending a long
letter stating he simply didn't have time to send a short one.

If we want to connect with customers, we have to stop blasting

them with noise.

The beautiful thing about clarifying your message using the SB7
framework is it makes communicating easy. No longer will you sit in
front of a blank page wondering what to say on your website, in
your elevator pitch, in your email blast, in your Facebook ads, or
even in your radio or television commercials.

CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE

Whether we run a small company or a multibillion-dollar brand,
confusing our customers is costing us money. How many of our team
members can't explain how we help our customers survive and
thrive? How many people are buying from our competition because
our competitors have communicated more clearly than we have?
How long will we last if we keep talking about aspects of our
products our customers don't care about?

Things can be different.
To clarify our message we're going to need a serious formula.
This formula needs to organize our thinking, reduce our marketing
effort, obliterate confusion, terrify the competition, and then get our
businesses growing again. Let's learn about that formula now.


CHAPTER 2

THE SECRET WEAPON THAT WILL
GROW YOUR BUSINESS

To help you grow your company, I'm going to guide you in
simplifying your message into sound bites that come from seven
categories. Once you have these seven messages down, any anxiety
you experience while talking about your brand will subside, and
customers will be more attracted to what you offer. These sound
bites will help you better understand your customers' story and place
yourself and your products right smack in the middle of it.

Story, after all, is atomic. Stories have always moved through
people to motivate and inspire their actions. Story is the energy that
has fueled every human movement and is the one thing that can
hold a person's attention for hours as entertainment and for years
when it informs a life purpose.

Nobody can look away from a good story. In fact, neuroscientists
claim the average human being spends more than 30 percent of
their time daydreaming--unless they're reading, listening to, or
watching a story unfold. Why? Because when we are engaged in a
story, the story does the daydreaming for us.

Story is the greatest weapon you have to combat noise because
it organizes information in such a way that people are compelled to
listen. If you want to bring attention to your brand, you must
understand how story works and how to invite customers into a
narrative that is compelling.


STORY MAKES MUSIC OUT OF NOISE

Living in Nashville, I've learned quite a bit about the difference
between music and noise. Nearly half the friends my wife and I
share are musicians. The talent around here is immense. Hardly a
dinner party goes by without somebody picking up a guitar.

I could summarize what I've learned about the difference
between music and noise by saying my friends make music and I
make noise, but there's actually some compelling science involved.

Technically speaking, music and noise are similar. Both are
created by traveling sound waves that rattle our eardrums. Music,
however, is noise that submits to certain rules that allow the brain to
engage on a different level. If I played you a recording of a dump
truck backing up, birds chirping, and children laughing, you'd not
remember those sounds the next day. But if I played you a Beatles
song, you'd likely hum it to yourself for a week.

There is an obvious difference between a well-choreographed
piece of music and the sound of a cat chasing a rat through a wind
chime factory, which is the equivalent of the average small business
website, leader's keynote speech, or sales rep's elevator pitch. The
brain remembers music and forgets about noise just like the brain
remembers some brands and forgets about others.

Story is similar to music. A good story takes a series of random
events and truths and distills them into the essence of what really
matters. There's a reason the final cut of a movie is called a final
cut. Prior to the theatrical release, a film has gone through rounds
upon rounds of edits, dialogue omissions, revisions, and scene
deletions. Sometimes entire characters end up on the cutting-room
floor. Why? Because storytellers utilize frameworks and filters to cut
out the noise. If a character or scene doesn't serve the plot, it has to
go.

When clients want to add a bunch of confusion to their marketing
message, I ask them to consider the ramifications of doing so if they
were writing a screenplay. I mean, what if The Bourne Identity were
a movie about a spy named Jason Bourne searching for his true


identity, but it also included scenes of Bourne trying to lose weight,
marry a girl, pass the bar exam, win on Jeopardy, and adopt a cat?
The audience would likely lose interest. When storytellers bombard
people with random information, the audience is forced to burn too
many calories to make sense of the drama. As a result, they
daydream and walk out of the theater, or in the case of our
marketing message, leave us for a competing brand where they
place their order.

Why do so many brands create noise rather than music? It's
because they don't realize they are creating noise. They actually
think people are interested in the random information they're doling
out.

This is why we need a filter. The essence of branding is to create
simple, relevant messages we can repeat over and over so that we
"brand" ourselves into the public consciousness.

STEVE JOBS AND THE MESSAGE OF APPLE

Apple began to grow into the company they are today only after
Steve Jobs began filtering his message through the frameworks that
thinking
storytellers use
transformed after working with (and partially creating) the genius
storytelling factory that is Pixar. When Jobs came back to Apple after
being surrounded by professional storytellers, he realized story was
the foundation on which every memorable brand had been built.

to build compelling narratives. His

Just think about the incredible transformation that took place in
Steve's life after Pixar. In 1983, Apple launched a computer called
Lisa, the last project Jobs worked on before he was let go. Jobs
released Lisa with a nine-page ad in the New York Times spelling out
the computer's technical features. It was nine pages of geek talk
nobody outside NASA was interested in. The computer bombed.

When Jobs returned to the company after running Pixar, Apple
their product offering,

became customer-centric, simple

in


compelling, and clear in their communication. The first campaign
Jobs released after returning from his time at Pixar, then, went from
nine pages in the New York Times to just two words on billboards all
over America: Think Different.

When Apple began filtering their communication to make it
simple and relevant, they actually stopped featuring computers in
most of their advertising. After all, nobody at the time knew why
they would need a computer. Instead, they understood their
customers were all living, breathing protagonists in stories they felt
were uninteresting. Jobs invited those heroes into a better story, one
in which they could be different, productive, artistic, and recognized.
The offer was clear: if you want to be different, choose Apple. The
story they invited the public into involved (1) identifying what their
customers wanted (to be seen and heard), (2) defining their
customers' challenge (that others didn't recognize their hidden
genius), and (3) offering their customers a tool they could use to
express themselves (computers and smartphones). Each of these
plot points is a pillar in ancient storytelling formulas and is critical for
connecting with the public.

I'll teach you about these three pillars and more in the coming
chapters, but for now realize the time Apple spent clarifying the role
they play in their customers' story is one of the primary factors
responsible for their growth.

Notice, though, the story of Apple isn't about Apple; it's about
you. You're the hero in the story, and they play a role more like Q in
the James Bond franchise: they are the guy you go see when you
need a tool to help you win the day.

Despite what acolytes of the cult of Mac may say, whether Apple
has the best technology is debatable. "Best" is subjective, of course.
But it doesn't matter. People don't buy the best products; they buy
the products they can understand and apply to their lives the fastest.
Apple has inserted themselves into their customers' story like no
other technology company, and as a result, they're not only the
largest technology company but one of the top ten largest
companies period.1 If we want our own businesses to grow, we


should borrow a page from their playbook. We should clarify our
message.

STORY CAN GROW YOUR BUSINESS

To better understand what Steve Jobs learned during his years at
Pixar, let's take off our business hats for a few pages and pretend
we're learning about story for the first time. Once you understand
how story integrates with your brand message, you'll be able to
create messaging material (and even a brand strategy) that engages
more customers and grows your business. And once you really
understand and can apply the framework intuitively, people around
the office will wonder how in the world you became such a
messaging and marketing genius.

After studying hundreds of movies, novels, plays, and musicals
across nearly every imaginable genre, and after having written
twelve books of my own along with cowriting a nationally released
major motion picture based on one of my books, I've narrowed
down the necessary elements of a compelling story to seven basic
plot points. If we were writing a full screenplay, of course, we'd need
more than this, but for the purposes of understanding and entering
into our customers' story, there are only seven critical plot points we
need to understand.

Story in a Nutshell

Here is nearly every story you watch, read, or hear in a nutshell:
A character who wants something encounters a problem before they
can get it. At the peak of their despair, a guide steps into their lives,
gives them a plan, and calls them to action. That action helps them
avoid failure and experience a success.

That's really it. You'll see some form of this structure in every
movie you watch, every novel you read, and every story you hear
from this moment forward. By understanding the formula I just told


you, you can essentially predict what is going to happen in almost
every story you encounter. These seven basic plot points are
powerful because they work to hold a human being's attention.
That's why that formula has been used in countless stories for
thousands of years. However, this formula is not stale or tiresome. In
fact, these plot points are like chords of music in the sense that you
can use them to create an infinite variety of narrative expression.
Just like playing the guitar, with these seven chords you can create
an infinite number of creative and engaging songs. Varying too far
from set chords, however, means a composer risks descending into
incomprehensible noise. Music, is, after all, noise submitted to rules.
If a songwriter breaks the rules, the audience fails to engage. This
idea is just as true for stories as it is for music. If a storyteller fails to
identify what the hero wants, or does not include enough conflict, or
fails to identify the stakes at play, then they are breaking the "rules
of story" and the consequences are dire: the audience stops paying
attention and the movie fails at the box office (or more likely never
gets approved for production).

What does any of this have to do with growing your business?
Everything. The same rules that get and keep a movie audience's
attention can also get and keep a customer's attention. And
attention is what you need more than anything else. But we will talk
more about how to apply story to your business later.

For now, let's look at how this simple story framework plays out
in a couple of familiar stories. Once you can recognize the
framework in stories, you'll start to understand exactly where the
story of your brand is confusing customers and costing you
influence.

In the first Hunger Games movie, Katniss Everdeen must
compete in a twisted fight-to-the-death tournament forced on the
people of Panem by an evil, tyrannical government called the
Capitol. The problem she faces is obvious: she must kill or be killed
(stakes). Katniss is overwhelmed, underprepared, and outnumbered
(a hero in a hole).

Along comes Haymitch, the brash, liquor-loving, grizzled winner
of a previous Hunger Games tournament (the Guide). Haymitch


assumes the role of Katniss's mentor, helping her hatch a plan to win
over the public (a plan). The plan is to get Katniss more sponsors,
thereby equipping her with more resources for the fight and
increasing her chances of winning.

Here is the first Hunger Games story laid out on the StoryBrand

grid:

In Star Wars: A New Hope, our reluctant hero, Luke Skywalker,
experiences a devastating tragedy: His aunt and uncle are murdered
at the hands of the evil Empire (a hero in a hole). This sets a series
of events in motion: Luke begins the journey of becoming a Jedi
Knight (enter a guide, Obi-Wan Kenobi, a former Jedi Knight who
once trained Luke's father) and destroys the Empire's battle station,
the Death Star, which allows the Rebellion to live and fight another
day (the plan).


Not every story works this way, but most do. Sometimes a writer
will bring in multiple guides or (usually to the story's peril) include
what I call a scattered climactic scene, but the formula holds up in
almost every story you'll encounter. The closer the screenwriter or
storyteller sticks to the formula, the more the audience loves the
story itself.

When Tom Cruise decided to make a sequel to his enormous boxoffice hit Top Gun, he might have created the most formulaic movie
in the history of man. The result: a $1.46 billion box-office
juggernaut, the highest-grossing movie of Tom Cruise's career.


The fact that nearly every movie you go see at the theater
includes all or most of the seven elements in the StoryBrand
framework means the framework itself is something we should
notice and respect. After thousands of years, storytellers the world
over have arrived at this formula (or one like it) as a means of best
practices. Simply put, this framework is the pinnacle of narrative
communication. The further we veer away from these seven
elements, the harder it becomes for audiences to engage. This is
why indie films, which often break from narrative formulas, fail to
gain critical acclaim and fail miserably at the box office. Critics
sometimes like movies that disobey formulas, but that is because
they are snobs who watch everything and are hungry for something
different. The masses, who do not study movies professionally, want
accessible stories that deliver entertainment.

Stories, by the way, don't have to be fictionalized to adhere to
the formulas. One of my favorite documentary series is called
Welcome to Wrexham, a true story about two Hollywood actors who
bought a bottom-level soccer team in Wrexham, England, only to
transform the team (and the town) from underdog losers into a finetuned winning machine. When the storytellers who produced the
documentary series edited the story, they made sure to include a
clear ambition in each episode, a challenge the heroes had to
overcome, backstories of the protagonists (in this case a group
protagonist story of townspeople, soccer players, family members,
and a couple of lovable actors who were, essentially, humble but
eager fish out of water) that caused us to like them, and tons and
tons and tons of stakes and challenges all leading to (I hate to ruin
it) skin-of-their-teeth victories. Wow. I think I lost two weeks of my
life on the couch just clicking "next episode." I got so deep into it
that my wife had to point out I was beginning to talk with a Welsh
accent and kindly asked me to stop using soccer metaphors like "you
really put this one in the back of the net" to describe her lovely
outfit.

It seems true that some brands (as well as some screenwriters)
break these formulas and succeed all the same, but when you look
closely, this is rarely the case. Brilliant screenwriters know how to


use the formula while still avoiding cliché. The same is true for
brilliant marketers, by the way. The ability to keep it clear yet unique
is what makes them brilliant. When you get good at the SB7
framework, hardly anybody will notice you are using it.

The Three Crucial Questions

So how do we make the story our company is telling clear?
Remember, the greatest enemy our business faces is the same
enemy that good stories face: noise. Here's a good test to know
whether the screenwriters are doing a good job keeping the story
clear: at no point should you be able to pause a movie and fail to
answer three critical questions.

1. What does the hero want?
2. Who or what is opposing the hero getting what they want?
3. What will the hero's life look like if they do (or do not) get

what they want?

If you've ever started daydreaming in a movie, it was likely
because your subconscious couldn't answer one of these questions,
or worse, you didn't care. Here's the kicker: if these three questions
can't be answered within the first fifteen to twenty minutes, the
story has already descended into noise and will almost certainly fail
its audience.

At StoryBrand, our certified coaches have reviewed thousands of
pages of marketing copy that had nothing to do with the customer's
story. We tell our clients the same thing my filmmaker friends told
me when I was writing screenplays: anything that doesn't serve the
plot has to go. Just because a tagline sounds great or a picture on a
website grabs the eye doesn't mean it helps us enter into our
customers' story. In every line of marketing and messaging copy we
write, we're either serving the customer's story or descending into
confusion; we're either making music or making noise.
Nobody remembers a company that makes noise.


DOES YOUR MARKETING PASS THE GRUNT TEST?

Just like there are three questions audiences must be able to answer
to engage in a story, there are three questions potential customers
must answer if we expect them to engage with our brand. And they
should be able to answer these questions within five seconds of
looking at our website or marketing material:

1. What do you offer?
2. How will it make my life better?
3. What do I need to do to buy it?

At StoryBrand, we call this passing the grunt test. The critical
question is this: Could a caveman look at your website and
immediately grunt your offer back to you?

Imagine a guy wearing a bearskin T-shirt, sitting in a cave by a
fire, with a laptop across his lap. He's looking at your website. Would
he be able to grunt an answer to the three questions posed above?
If you were an aspirin company, would he be able to grunt, "You sell
headache medicine, me feel better fast, me get it at Walgreens"? If
not, you're likely losing sales.

Cut it with the cute copy that expensive ad agency charged you
for. Nobody wants to go to your website and figure out a riddle. Just.
Be. Clear.

CLARITY PRODUCES RESULTS

One of our early clients, Kyle Shultz, was a fireman in Ohio who
looked into StoryBrand because he wanted to leave his job and
pursue his passion of teaching photography. He had recently
launched an online photography course aimed at parents. He'd
worked hard to create terrific video training allowing moms
everywhere to finally start using that basic camera they'd placed in


the junk drawer because they felt it was too complicated. Interest
was decent. In his first launch, he sold $25,000 worth of online
courses. He was ecstatic. Still, it wasn't enough money for him to
quit his job and pursue teaching photography full-time.

When Kyle encountered the SB7 framework, he began to wonder
whether his message was too confusing. The night before his next
launch he used the framework to completely rewrite his website. In
fact, he removed 90 percent of the text he'd previously used on his
sales page and stopped using inside language like "f-stop" and
"depth of field." Instead, he used phrases like "Take those great
pictures where the background is blurry."

The next day Kyle sent a mass email to the exact same email list
he'd contacted only six months before and offered the course again.
He wasn't expecting much because he'd already sold to this list, but
to his surprise the course sold another $103,000 worth of
registrations.

The difference? He highlighted the aspects of his course that
would help parents survive and thrive (build stronger tribes,
strengthen family connections, and connect more deeply with life's
greater meaning), and he did so in such a simple way (with fewer
than three hundred words on his sales page) that people didn't have
to burn calories to figure out what was in it for them. Overnight,
he'd gone from a cluttered mess to the clear guide in his customers'
story.

Today, Kyle has quit his job and runs Shultz Photo School fulltime. Every day he gets emails from parents thanking him for
helping them feel great about the photographs they're taking of their
children.

Here's another story: My wife made a friend named Nicole Burke.
Her mission to make gardening ordinary was slowly gaining traction
through her business, Gardenary. Nicole has a terrific, ready-fortelevision personality and has attracted a lot of clients. When she
joined my mastermind and I reviewed her messaging collateral, I
had to let her know that nobody wakes up wanting to make
gardening ordinary. Her mission was just that: her mission. It wasn't
the domain
her customers' mission.

told her

to buy

I


StartAGarden.com because tons of people wake up on respective
mornings and realize they want to start a garden. A quick
Amazon.com and web search revealed nobody owned that idea. The
mental real estate was wide open and she took it. Today, Nicole's
business is poised to quadruple in revenue and influence, not
because she launched a new product or because she got that
television show (which she deserves) but because she started being
clear. I believe Nicole is going to be a household name one day.
Why? Because she is going to own a problem. If you want to start a
garden, go see Nicole. The irony of her story is that by branding
herself as the woman who can help you start a garden, she will
make gardening ordinary, thus accomplishing her original mission.
The moral: we will not accomplish our mission by explaining our own
story; we will accomplish our mission by inviting customers into a
story in which they can experience a clear win.

WE NEED A FILTER

Alfred Hitchcock defined a good story as "life with the dull parts
taken out."2 Good branding is the same. Our businesses are
complex, for sure, but a good messaging filter will remove all the
stuff that bores our customers and will accentuate the aspects of our
brand that will help them survive and thrive.

So how do we come up with these messages? It's simple. We use
a storytelling grid to map out a story our customers step into, then
we create clear and refined statements in the seven relevant
categories of their lives to position ourselves as their guides. When
we do this, we become the people who help them overcome their
challenges and achieve a life they want to live.

Once we begin filtering our message through the SB7 framework
and using it as a communication filter, we will be able to repeat
powerful messages over and over that "brand" us into our
customers' lives.


The SB7 framework is simple, fun, and effective. And when
you're done, your entire brand message is going to sit on a single
sheet of paper. We call this single sheet of paper (actually, it's a free
digital application I'm going to introduce you to) the StoryBrand
BrandScript.

Once you've finished the process, you'll use your BrandScript to
create all manner of improved messaging and marketing material,
and you'll be more clearly positioned in the marketplace. Think of
the StoryBrand framework as a weight-loss plan for messaging and
marketing. When your messaging is lean and muscular, customers
will finally start to listen. When customers understand how you can
help them live a great story, your business will grow.

With that, let's take a look at the StoryBrand framework.


CHAPTER 3

THE SIMPLE SB7 FRAMEWORK

In the following chapters, I'll dive deep into the elements of the SB7
framework, showing you how each important category of messaging
makes your brand more and more inviting to customers. You will use
these seven categories to create powerful sound bites you can easily
repeat over and over to get astonishing results. For now, though,
let's take an overview so you can understand, in summary form, all
that the StoryBrand framework can do to simplify your marketing
and messaging.

THE STORYBRAND FRAMEWORK

1. A Character

STORYBRAND PRINCIPLE ONE: THE CUSTOMER IS THE HERO, NOT YOUR BRAND.


A major paradigm shift in the SB7 framework is that the
customer is the hero of the story, not your brand. When we position
our customer as the hero and ourselves as the guide, we will be
recognized as a trusted resource to help our customers overcome
their challenges.

it's also good business. However,

Positioning the customer as the hero in the story is more than
just good manners;
it's
counterintuitive. Communication expert Nancy Duarte has done
extensive research on how to create powerful presentations. The
strategy she recommends to her clients is simple: When giving a
speech, position yourself as Yoda and your audience as Luke
Skywalker.1 This small but powerful shift honors the journey of the
audience and positions us as a leader providing wisdom, products,
and services they need in order to thrive.

In marketing and messaging, too many business leaders position
themselves as the hero--and it's a turnoff. Imagine going to a movie
in which the story stops so the screenwriter can come on screen to
brag about how awesome the story is going and how brilliant they
are at creating such great characters. No screenwriter would do that,
would they? Yet business leaders do it all the time. Rather than
invite their customers into a story, they talk about themselves, their
mission, their goals, their backstory, and all sorts of stuff no
customer cares about. Instead, let's understand our products from
the customer's perspective.

Once we identify who our customer is, we have to ask ourselves
what they want as it relates to our brand. The catalyst for any story
is that the hero wants something. The rest of the story is a journey
of discovering whether the hero will get what they want.

Unless we identify something our customer wants, they will never
feel invited into the story we are creating. As we explore the first
element of the StoryBrand framework, I'll show you what customers
really want from your brand and how to invite them into a story that
makes them pay attention to your brand so they can get what they
want.


2. Has a Problem

STORYBRAND PRINCIPLE TWO: THE ONLY THINGS PEOPLE BUY ARE SOLUTIONS
TO PROBLEMS, AND IF YOU HAVEN'T IDENTIFIED YOUR CUSTOMER'S PROBLEMS OR
FAIL TO TALK ABOUT THEM CLEARLY, YOU AREN'T GOING TO SELL ANYTHING.

In its purest form, a story starts with a character who lives in
peace and stability. Suddenly that stability is disrupted: a bomb goes
off, someone is kidnapped, or a disaster strikes. This sets up the
start of the story, a predicament I call the hero in a hole. Once your
hero is in a hole, the story begins, which, of course, is all about
getting the hero out of the hole. The hero then sets out on a journey
to return to the peaceful life they once enjoyed.

Customers are attracted to our brands for the same reason
heroes are pulled into stories: They want to solve a problem that
has, in big or small ways, disrupted their peaceful life. In short,
every one of our customers is a "hero in a hole" looking for a way
out. Whether they are looking for the perfect Mother's Day gift, relief
from a headache, whiter teeth, a larger car to fit their growing
family, or an investment that doubles as a tax break, your customers
are in a hole and are looking for a way out. If we sell lawn-care
products, our customers are coming to us because they're
embarrassed about their lawn or they simply don't have time to do
the work. If we sell financial advice, they're coming to us because
they're worried about their retirement plan. It may not be as
dramatic or sexy as James Bond going to Q to grab the latest hightech spy weapon, but the premise is the same: our customers are in
trouble and need our help.


By talking about the problems our customers face, we deepen

their interest in everything we offer.

What most brands miss, however, is that there are three levels of
problems a customer encounters. In stories, heroes encounter
external, internal, and philosophical problems. Why? Because these
are the same three levels of problems human beings face in their
everyday lives. Almost all companies try to sell solutions to external
problems, but as we unfold the StoryBrand framework, you'll see
why customers are much more motivated to resolve their inner
frustrations.

In the second element of the StoryBrand framework, we'll look at
the three levels of problems our customers experience and create
messages offering to resolve those problems. Understanding and
addressing the three levels of problems our customers face will help
us create a brand promise that will connect with customers on a
primitive level and at their deepest point of need. This, in turn, will
help us endear customers and create passionate brand evangelists.

3. And Meets a Guide

STORYBRAND PRINCIPLE THREE: CUSTOMERS AREN'T LOOKING FOR ANOTHER
HERO; THEY'RE LOOKING FOR A GUIDE.

If heroes in a story could solve their own problems, they would
never get into trouble in the first place. That's why storytellers,
through the centuries, have created another character to help the
hero win. Depending on the scholar you talk to, there are many
names for this character, but the term we use at StoryBrand is the
guide.


In Tom Hooper's Academy Award-winning film The King's
Speech, King George VI struggles to overcome a debilitating stutter.
As Britain prepares for war against Germany, the Brits look to their
leader for confidence and direction. Desperate, King George VI
solicits the help of Lionel Logue, a dramatist turned speech therapist,
who gives him a plan, coaches him to competency, and helps him
transform into a powerful orator. This emotional and strategic
support are the same service Obi-Wan (and Yoda) offers Luke
Skywalker in Star Wars, Haymitch offers Katniss in The Hunger
Games, Bing Bong offers Joy in Pixar's Inside Out, and countless
other guides offer countless other heroes in nearly all our favorite
stories.

It's no accident that guides show up in almost every narrative
you encounter. Nearly every human being is looking for a guide (or
guides) to help them win the day.

To position yourself as a hero is a mistake. Brands that position
themselves as heroes unknowingly complicate their relationship with
potential customers. Every human being wakes up each morning and
sees the world through the lens of a protagonist. The world revolves
around them, regardless of how altruistic, generous, and selfless a
person they may be. Each day is, quite literally, about how we
encounter our world. Potential customers feel the same way about
themselves. They are the center of their world.

When a brand comes along and positions itself as the hero,
customers remain distant. They hear us talking about how great our
business is and subconsciously believe we're competing with them
for scarce resources. Their subconscious thought pattern goes like
this: Oh, this is another hero, like me. I wish I had more time to
hear their story, but right now I'm busy looking for a guide to get me
out of this hole.

Many brands have wrecked their potential by playing the hero
instead of the guide. Many politicians have lost their elections
because they positioned themselves as the hero instead of the
guide. Many products have flopped upon launch, not because the
product was bad but because the product itself was not positioned
as a tool the hero could use to get out of their hole. These are fatal


mistakes and, sadly, they are made all the time. As we explore the
third element of the StoryBrand framework, we'll look at two mental
triggers that will position you, your brand, and your products as the
guide with the resources your customers have been looking for.

4. Who Gives Them a Plan

STORYBRAND PRINCIPLE FOUR: CUSTOMERS TRUST A GUIDE WHO GIVES THEM A
PLAN.

At this point in our customers' story we've identified what they
want, defined three levels of problems they're encountering, and
positioned ourselves as their guide. And our customers love us for
the effort. But they still aren't going to make a purchase. Why?
Because we haven't laid out a simple plan of action they can take to
get out of their hole.

Making a purchase is a huge step, especially if our products or
services are expensive or time-consuming to adopt. What customers
are looking for, then, is a clear path we've laid out that takes away
any confusion they might have about how the process of getting out
of the hole is going to work. The StoryBrand element we will use to
create this path is called the plan.

In almost every story, the guide gives the hero a plan, usually in
the form of a few steps they can take to get the job done. In the
Star Wars movies, Yoda tells Luke to trust the Force and then trains
him on how to wield this power. Lionel gives King George a series of
exercises he can use to control his stutter in The King's Speech. The
point is that people are looking for a philosophy they can embody or
a series of steps they can take to solve their problems.


In the fourth element of the StoryBrand framework, we'll look at
two kinds of plans: the agreement plan and the process plan. Each
of these plans will earn trust and offer our customers a clear path to
stability, effectively creating a ladder they can use to get out of their
hole, greatly increasing the chance they will make a purchase.

5. And Calls Them to Action

STORYBRAND PRINCIPLE FIVE: CUSTOMERS DO NOT TAKE ACTION UNLESS THEY
ARE CHALLENGED TO TAKE ACTION.

In stories, characters don't take action on their own. They must
be challenged. If we're telling a story about a man who needs to
lose thirty pounds and suddenly decides to do it of his own volition,
the audience will be unable to suspend disbelief. Why? Because
that's not how life works. There needs to be a reason our hero takes
action. Our character has to run into a high school sweetheart who
is now a yoga instructor, or he needs to lose a bet that forces him to
run a marathon. In stories, heroes take action only after they are
challenged by an outside force.

This principle is true in story because it's true in life. Human

beings take action when their story challenges them to do so.

You would be surprised how many companies don't create
obvious calls to action for their customers. They use phrases like
"learn more" or "get started," which are more like passive-aggressive
suggestions than clear calls to action. A call to action involves
communicating a clear and direct step our customer can take to
overcome their challenge and return to a peaceful life. Without clear
calls to action, people will not engage our brand.


In the fifth part of the StoryBrand framework, I'll show you two
calls to action that have worked for thousands of our clients. One
call to action is direct, asking the customer for a purchase or to
schedule an appointment. The other is a transitional call to action,
furthering our relationship with the customer so we can continue to
earn trust until they are ready to place an order. This changed my
life forever and more than quadrupled the revenue of my own
company when I put it into practice. Once we begin using both kinds
of calls to action in our messaging, customers will understand
exactly what we want them to do and will decide whether to let us
play a role in their story. Until we call our customers to action, they
will be inclined to ignore us, but when we call them to action (the
right way), they will engage and place orders.

6. That Helps Them Avoid Failure

STORYBRAND PRINCIPLE SIX: EVERY HUMAN BEING IS TRYING TO AVOID A
TRAGIC ENDING TO THEIR STORY.

Stories sizzle or fizzle based on a single question: What's at
stake? If nothing can be gained or lost, nobody cares. Will the hero
disarm the bomb, or will people be killed? Will the hero get the girl,
or will he be lonely and filled with self-doubt? These are the desired
stakes being weighed in the minds of a story-hungry audience, and
if we fail to include them, the audience quickly loses interest.

If there is nothing at stake in a story, there is no story. Likewise,
if there's nothing at stake in whether I buy your product, I'm not
going to buy your product. After all, why should I?


Simply put, we must show people the cost of not doing business

with us.

In the eighties, the fast-food chain Wendy's effectively asked
America, "Where's the beef?" The implication was that their
competitors weren't using enough meat. So what's at stake for
choosing another brand over Wendy's? We might get stuck with a
wimpy sandwich. Likewise, Whole Foods has built an enormous
industry helping customers avoid the consequences of overly
processed foods, and Trader Joe's flourishes by helping customers
avoid the consequences of Whole Foods' prices. All health food
products are sold based on the stakes of un-health, feeling tired,
shortened longevity, and so on. When inviting customers into a
story, stakes matter.

Brands that help customers avoid some kind of negativity in life
(and clearly define what that negativity is by using plain language)
engage them for the same reason good stories captivate an
audience: they define what's at stake.

As we explore the sixth element of the StoryBrand framework, I'll
help you identify what's at stake in your customers' story as it
relates to your brand. Before we move on, though, it's important to
note that by talking about your customers' problems and by painting
the negative stakes, you will not come off as negative. As I've
worked with thousands of brands to incorporate the framework, they
are often concerned their brand will come off as pessimistic and
sour. If this is a concern for you, know that the deeper the hole your
hero transcends, the more powerful and positive the perceived
outcome. If you fail to paint the negative stakes, you're essentially
saying the hole your customer is in is not that deep, which cheapens
the perceived value of your brand to rescue them. In other words,
all negativity becomes positivity the moment the negativity is
overcome. In element six, I will help you talk about the negative
stakes your hero customers may encounter in such a way that they
will think of you in the most positive light possible.

7. And Ends in a Success


STORYBRAND PRINCIPLE SEVEN: NEVER ASSUME PEOPLE UNDERSTAND HOW
YOUR BRAND CAN CHANGE THEIR LIVES FOR THE BETTER. TELL THEM.

We must tell our customers how great their life can look if they
buy our products and services. Ronald Reagan painted a picture of
"a shining city on a hill."2 Bill Clinton offered to help us "build a
bridge to the twenty-first century."3 During the dark and dreary
Depression, Franklin Roosevelt used the song "Happy Days Are Here
Again" as his official campaign song.4 Likewise, Apple provides tools
that allow us to express ourselves and be heard, Weight Watchers
helps us lose weight and feel great, and Men's Wearhouse
guarantees we will like the way we look. In essence, each of these
brands lets potential customers (or voters) know what their lives can
look like once they get out of their hole.

Think of it this way: everybody wants to be taken somewhere,
and if we fail to tell people where we are capable of taking them,
they will engage another brand.

In the seventh element of the StoryBrand framework, I'll
elaborate on a critical sound bite to round out your messaging
strategy: offering a vision for how great a customer's life could be if
they engage your products or services. What sort of positive
messages work? We will explore this and more in element seven.

WHEN YOU FEEL CONFUSED, CLARIFY YOUR
MESSAGE


Right about now your head may be spinning. Even though there are
only seven elements to the framework, how do we narrow down our
message so our marketing and messaging material gets results?

We've created a tool to simplify the process. This tool is going to
reduce the hassle of creating a clear message, save you time,
entertain you as you use it, and motivate you to create messaging
material that works. As I mentioned earlier, this tool is called the
StoryBrand BrandScript, and it's going to become your new best
friend.

Not only this, but we've updated the StoryBrand BrandScript to
include AI prompts that will allow you to not only generate better
sound bites but expand those sound bites into full messaging and
marketing campaigns you can use to invite customers into a story.
Nearly a million people have used the BrandScript tool in its old
form, and now we've expanded its capability and look forward to
hearing even more stories of outstanding results. The BrandScript is
completely free for you as a bonus for purchasing this book.

You can create your StoryBrand BrandScript and subsequent
messaging and marketing campaign at StoryBrand.AI, and it looks
like this:


In the next seven chapters, I'm going to walk you through these
seven elements of the framework and help you create your
BrandScript. Your BrandScript will then reveal a series of short,
simple sound bites you can use in all matter of messaging and
marketing, including websites, keynote addresses, lead generators,
digital and traditional advertising, and even casual conversation. You
will find that when you create your sound bites and use them, your
brand will gain more and more traction, and the more often you
repeat them, the more you will succeed. Once you've created your
sound bites, you'll no longer feel confused about how to talk about
your products and services, and you'll have messages you can count
on to powerfully engage potential customers.

The first project you should BrandScript is the one that
represents your overall brand. Next you'll want to create a


BrandScript for each division of your company, and after that, each
product within each division. If you like, you can even create a
BrandScript for each segment of your customer base. The uses for a
StoryBrand BrandScript are endless. In fact, I used the StoryBrand
BrandScript to outline this book and then used even more
BrandScripts to write each chapter.

If you want to say it clearly, create a StoryBrand BrandScript.

Again, to create a BrandScript you can save, edit, and come back

to over and over, go to StoryBrand.AI.


Creating a StoryBrand BrandScript will do more than create a
clear message you can use to engage customers; it will also give you
clarity about the value you offer to the world. Many business leaders
know their products are important but aren't exactly sure why. This
confusion can create a lack of confidence about what you have
created or what you represent. When you create a BrandScript, you
will have much more confidence that what you do matters to the
world.

CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERS LISTEN

As you walk through the seven elements of the StoryBrand
framework, simply follow these three steps:

1. Read each of the next seven chapters.
2. After you read each chapter, brainstorm potential messages

you might use to populate your BrandScript.

3. Carefully look at your brainstorm and then decide on a

specific message to use in each section of your BrandScript.

Remember: simple, clear messages that are relevant to your

customers result in sales.

Every human being is already fluent in storytelling, so when you
begin using the SB7 framework, you'll finally be speaking their
language.

THE STAKES ARE HIGH

You're going to be tempted to move ahead and skip thinking
deliberately about each of the seven elements of the framework.


You've already got the BrandScript, after all, so why not just fill it
out?

Amateur screenwriters make the same mistake. They think they
know how a story works, so they start typing and a couple of
months later can't figure out why their story is boring or unrelatable.
I'll tell you why. They had an overview of the process but never
bothered to learn the actual rules.

Each module of the SB7 framework has set-in-stone rules you
cannot break--or else customers won't find themselves in the story
you're telling and will be much less likely to engage your brand.

Thousands of companies shut their doors every year, not because
they don't have a great product but because potential customers
can't figure out how that product will make their lives better. If we
don't closely analyze each element of our customers' story, they'll
sense we don't care and will move on to a competing brand that
took the time to do the work.

Some of you are probably thinking it's too late. I mean, if it's
printed in a book, everybody else is probably doing it. But are they?
How many people read the first twenty pages of a book and then
stop reading? I'd say most, which means you're already ahead of
them. What would happen if you committed to executing this
process and your competitor didn't? You'd win, wouldn't you? And
how many people are actually going to put in the work even if they
do read the book? Believe me, human nature tends toward
complacency. Finish this process. Beat the competition. Clarify your
message. Grow your business. The competition may be even more
talented than you are, but they will never outwork you if you don't
let them. That's the one thing you get to control.

In the next seven chapters, I'll show you how to create a clear
and compelling message that will organize your thoughts, simplify
your marketing, and grow your company.


SECTION 2

BUILDING YOUR
STORYBRAND

When you're confused, create a StoryBrand
BrandScript.



CHAPTER 4

A CHARACTER

StoryBrand Principle One: The customer is the
hero, not your brand.

A story doesn't begin until the hero wants something. To engage
the audience, the hero will need to disarm a bomb, win someone's
heart, defeat a villain, or fight for their emotional or physical
survival. Until it is clear what the hero wants, the audience is left
waiting for "the story to get started." Once the storyteller defines
what the hero wants, the question becomes, Will the hero get what
she wants? And it's this single question that drives what I call
narrative traction.

Positing the overall story question is why screenwriters have to
define the character's ambition within the first nine or so minutes of
a film. Will the underdog get the promotion? Will the runner finish
the marathon? Will the team win the championship? These are the
questions that can keep an audience engaged for hours on end.

If we want customers to engage our brand the way they engage
their favorite movie, we, too, must d