benefit the brand, it didn’t. That same year Evian lost market share and sales dropped almost 25 percent.

The problem? Roller-skating babies are cute, but they have nothing to do with Evian. So people shared the clip, but that didn’t benefit the brand.

—————

The key, then, is to not only make something viral, but also make it valuable to the sponsoring company or organization. Not just virality but valuable virality.

Take Barclay Prime’s hundred-dollar cheesesteak that we talked about at the beginning of the book. Compared with dancing babies and bottled water, an expensive, high-end cheesesteak and an expensive, high-end steak restaurant are clearly more related. And the item wasn’t just a stunt, it was an actual option on Barclay’s menu. Further, it directly spoke to the inferences the restaurant wanted consumers to make about its food: high quality but not stuffy, lavish but creative.

Virality is most valuable when the brand or product benefit is integral to the story. When it’s woven so deeply into the narrative that people can’t tell the story without mentioning it.

One of my favorite examples of valuable virality comes from the Egyptian dairy company Panda, which makes a variety of different cheese products.

The commercials always start innocuously: workers talking about what to have for lunch, or a hospital nurse checking in on a patient. In one spot a father is grocery shopping with his son. “Dad, why don’t we get some Panda cheese?” the son asks as they walk by the dairy aisle. “Enough!” the father replies. “We have enough stuff in the cart already.”

Then the panda appears. Or rather, a man in a panda suit. There’s simply no way to describe adequately the ludicrousness of this moment. Yes, a giant panda is suddenly standing in the middle of a grocery store. Or in a different commercial, an office. Or in another, a medical clinic.

In the grocery-store video, the father and son stare at the panda, obviously dumbfounded. As a Buddy Holly tune plays, the boy and his father look at the Panda cheese on the shelf, then back to the panda. And back and forth again. The father gulps.

Then, pandemonium ensues (excuse the pun).

The panda slowly walks toward the shopping cart, calmly places both hands on its sides, and flips it over.

Food flies all over the aisle—pasta, canned goods, and liquids everywhere. The stare-down continues as the father and the panda stand on opposite ends of the cart. A long pause ensues. Then the panda kicks the overturned food for good measure. “Never say no to Panda,” a voice intones as a panda hand flashes the product on the screen.

The commercial and others like it are impeccably timed and utterly hilarious. I’ve shown them to everyone from college kids to financial service executives and everyone laughs until their sides hurt.

But note that what makes these videos so great is not just that they’re funny. The commercial would have been just as funny if the guy was dressed in a chicken suit or if the tagline was, “Never say no to Jim’s used cars.” Someone dressed in an animal suit kicking groceries is funny regardless of which animal it is or what product it’s for.

They’re successful—and great examples of valuable virality—because the brand is an integral part of the stories. Mentioning the panda is a natural part of the conversation. In fact, you’d have to try pretty hard not to mention the panda and still have the story make sense (much less get people to understand why it’s funny). So the best part of the story and the brand name are perfectly intertwined. That increases the chance not only that people telling the story will talk about Panda the brand, but also that they will remember what product the commercial is for, days or even weeks later. Panda is part and parcel of the story. It’s an essential part of the narrative.

The same can be said for Blendtec’s Will It Blend? campaign. It’s impossible to tell the story of the clips where the blender tears through an iPhone without talking about a blender. And without recognizing that the Blendtec blender in the videos must be extremely tough—so strong that it can blend almost anything. Which is exactly what Blendtec wants to communicate.

—————

In trying to craft contagious content, valuable virality is critical. That means making the idea or desired benefit a key part of the narrative. It’s like the plot of a good detective story. Some details are critical to the narrative and some are extraneous. Where were the different suspects at the time of the murder? Critical. What was the detective eating for dinner while he mulled over the details of the case? Not so important.

The same distinction can be applied to the content we’ve been discussing. Take Ron Bensimhon’s Olympic stunt. Jumping into a pool? Critical. GoldenPalace.com? Pretty much irrelevant.

The importance of these different types of details becomes even clearer when people retell the story. Think about the story of the Trojan Horse. It has survived for thousands of years. There is a written account of the story, but most of the details people know come from hearing someone else talk about it. But which details people remember and retell? It isn’t random. Critical details stick around, while irrelevant ones drop out.

Psychologists Gordon Allport and Joseph Postman examined a similar issue more than fifty years ago. They were keenly interested in what happened to rumors as they spread from person to person. Did the stories stay the same as they were transmitted or did they change? And if they changed, were there predictable patterns in how rumors evolved?

To address this question, they had people play what most of us would describe as a game of Telephone.

First, someone was shown a picture of a detailed situation—in one case, a group of people on a subway car. The car appears to be an Eighth Avenue Express and it is going past Dyckman Street. There are various advertisements posted on the car, and five people are seated, including a rabbi and a mother carrying her baby. But the focus of the picture is two men having an argument. They are standing up, and one is pointing at the other and holding a knife.

Then the game of Telephone starts. The first person (transmitter) is asked to describe the picture to someone else (receiver), who cannot see it. The transmitter conveys the various details as he sees fit. The transmitter then leaves the room and a new person enters. That new person becomes the receiver, and the original receiver becomes the transmitter, sharing what happened in the image with the new receiver, who also hasn’t seen the image. Then the original receiver leaves the room, a new person enters, and the game is repeated to a fourth, fifth, and eventually sixth person. Allport and Postman then looked at which story details persisted along the transmission chain.

They found that the amount of information shared dropped dramatically each time the rumor was shared. Around 70 percent of the story details were lost in the first five to six transmissions.

But the stories didn’t just become shorter: they were also sharpened around the main point or key details. Across dozens of transmission chains there were common patterns. Certain details were consistently left out and certain details were consistently retained. In the story about the subway car the first person telling the story mentioned all the details. They talked about how the subway car seemed to be an Eighth Avenue Express, how it was going past Dyckman Street, and how there were a number of people on it, two of them arguing.

But as the story was passed on down the telephone line, many of the unimportant details got stripped out. People stopped talking about what type of subway it was or where it was traveling and instead focused on the argument. The fact that one person was pointing at the other and brandishing a knife. Just as in the detective story, people mentioned the critical details and left out the extraneous ones.

—————

If you want to craft contagious content, try to build your own Trojan Horse. But make sure you think about valuable virality. Make sure the information you want people to remember and transmit is critical to the narrative. Sure, you can make your narrative funny, surprising, or entertaining. But if people don’t connect the content back to you, it’s not going to help you very much. Even if it goes viral.

So build a Social Currency–laden, Triggered, Emotional, Public, Practically Valuable Trojan Horse, but don’t forget to hide your message inside. Make sure your desired information is so embedded into the plot that people can’t tell the story without it.





Epilogue


Ask three people where they got their last manicure, and chances are good that at least one of them had a Vietnamese nail technician. But the story of how it got that way might surprise you. It started with twenty women and a set of long coral nails.

She’d been a high school teacher in her home country, but when Thuan Le arrived at Hope Village in 1975, she had nothing but the clothes on her back. The tent city outside Sacramento was a holding ground for Vietnamese refugees who escaped to America after the fall of Saigon. Teeming with new immigrants, the camp simultaneously brimmed with hope and despair. People had come to America with dreams of a better life for themselves and their families, but with little English knowledge, so the possibilities were limited.

Actress Tippi Hedren, who had starred in Alfred Hitchcock’s The Birds, was drawn to the refugees’ plight and would visit Hope Village every few days. Hedren wanted to help, so she became a mentor to some of the women. Former business owners, teachers, and government officials in Vietnam, these industrious women were eager to get to work. Hedren was enchanted by their stories of Vietnam. They, in turn, noticed something about her: her beautiful nails.

The women admired Hedren’s glossy light pink fingernails, so she brought her manicurist in once a week to give them lessons. How to trim cuticles, wrap nails, and remove calluses. The women were quick studies and practiced on Hedren, themselves, and anyone they could get their hands on.

Soon a plan was hatched. Hedren got the women free classes at a nearby beauty school. They learned how to file, paint, and trim. Then Hedren asked around and helped Le and the other women find jobs in Santa Monica and surrounding cities.

It was tough at first. Manicures were not yet the rage and there was lots of competition. But Le and the other women passed their licensing exams and started doing business. They worked hard, labored long hours, and took the jobs no one else wanted. The women were diligent and kept at it. They made money and worked their way up.

Seeing Le’s success, a few of her friends decided to get into the business. They opened one of the first beauty salons owned by Vietnamese Americans and encouraged others to do the same.

The success stories soon spread. The thousands of Vietnamese who came to the United States looking for new possibilities heard what others were doing, and they listened. Vietnamese nail salons started opening up all around Sacramento. Then through the rest of California. Then the entire country. These twenty women started the trend, but soon it had a life of its own.

Today, 80 percent of manicurists in California are Vietnamese Americans. Nationwide the number is greater than 40 percent.

Vietnamese nail salons became contagious.

—————

The story of Thuan, Tippi, and the spread of Vietnamese nail salons is pretty amazing. But even more surprising is the fact that it’s not unique.

Other immigrant groups have cornered similar niches. Estimates suggest that Cambodian Americans own approximately 80 percent of the doughnut shops in Los Angeles, and that Koreans own 65 percent of the dry cleaners in New York City. In the 1850s, 60 percent of the liquor stores in Boston were run by Irishmen. In the early 1900s, Jews produced 85 percent of men’s clothes. The list goes on.

When you think about it, these stories make a lot of sense. People move to a new country and start looking for work. But while the immigrants may have had various skilled jobs previously, their options in the new country are often limited. There is a language barrier, it’s tough to transfer previous certifications or qualifications, and they don’t have as many contacts as they had back home. So immigrants look to their friends and acquaintances for help.

And as with the rest of the products and ideas we’ve talked about throughout the book, social influence and word of mouth kick in. The topic of employment is frequent among new immigrants looking for work (Triggers). So they look to see what jobs other recent immigrants have taken (Public) and talk to them about the best opportunities. These more established immigrants want to look good (Social Currency) and help others (Practical Value) so they tell exciting (Emotion) narratives (Stories) about others they know who have been successful.

Soon these new immigrants follow their peers and pursue the same line of work.

—————

The story of Vietnamese manicurists, and immigrants’ choice of occupations more generally, highlights a number of points we’ve discussed throughout the book.

First, any product, idea, or behavior can be contagious. We’ve talked about blenders (Will It Blend?), bars (Please Don’t Tell), and breakfast cereals (Cheerios). “Naturally” exciting products, like discount shopping (Rue La La) and high-end restaurants (Barclay Prime’s hundred-dollar cheesesteak) and less traditionally buzz-worthy goods like corn (Ken Craig’s “Clean Ears Everytime”) and online search (Google’s “Parisian Love”). Products (iPod’s white headphones) and services (Hotmail) but also nonprofits (Movember and Livestrong bands), health behaviors (“Man Drinks Fat”), and whole industries (Vietnamese nail salons). Even soap (Dove’s “Evolution”). Social influence helps all sorts of products and ideas catch on.

Second, we saw that rather than being caused by a handful of special “influential” people, social epidemics are driven by the products and ideas themselves.

Sure, every great story has a hero. Tippi Hedren helped Vietnamese women learn about manicures, and George Wright had the creative idea that started Will It Blend? But while these individuals provided the initial spark, they’re only one small part of the story. Describing why a small handful of cool or connected people (so-called influentials) are not as important to social epidemics as we might think, sociologist Duncan Watts makes a nice comparison to forest fires. Some forest fires are bigger than others, but no one would claim that the size of the fire depends on the exceptional nature of the initial spark. Big forest fires aren’t caused by big sparks. Lots of individual trees have to catch fire and carry the flames.

Contagious products and ideas are like forest fires. They can’t happen without hundreds, if not thousands, of regular Joes and Janes passing the product or message along.

So why did thousands of people transmit these products and ideas?

And that’s where we get to the third point: certain characteristics make products and ideas more likely to be talked about and shared. You might have thought it was just random why some things catch on, that certain products and ideas just got lucky. But it’s not just luck. And it’s not a mystery. The same key principles drive all sorts of social epidemics. Whether it’s about getting people to save paper, see a documentary, try a service, or vote for a candidate, there is a recipe for success. The same six principles, or STEPPS, drive things to catch on.

Social Currency

We share things that make us look good



Triggers

Top of mind, tip of tongue



Emotion

When we care, we share



Public

Built to show, built to grow



Practical Value

News you can use



Stories

Information travels under the guise of idle chatter



So if we’re trying to make a product or idea contagious, think about how to build in these key STEPPS.

Some of this can happen in the design of the product or idea itself. The hundred-dollar cheesesteak was engineered to have Social Currency. Rebecca Black’s song was frequently triggered because of its title. Susan Boyle’s performance evoked lots of Emotion. Movember raised millions for men’s cancer by taking a once private behavior and using moustaches to make it Public. Ken Craig’s “Clean Ears Everytime” video is two minutes of pure Practical Value.

But these STEPPS can also be built into messaging around a product or idea. Blendtec’s blenders had always been powerful, but by showing that power in a remarkable way, the Will It Blend? videos generated Social Currency and got people buzzing. Kit Kat didn’t change its product, but by linking it to a popular beverage (coffee), the company increased the number of Triggers to make people think (and talk) about the candy bar. People share Vanguard’s MoneyWhys because they provide Practical Value, but passing them along boosts word of mouth for the company itself. People shared Dove’s “Evolution” video because it evokes lots of Emotion, but by embedding itself in the narrative, Dove benefits from the chatter as well.

If you want to apply this framework, here’s a checklist you can use to see how well your product or idea is doing on the six different STEPPS.

Follow these six key STEPPS, or even just a few of them, and you can harness social influence and word of mouth to get any product or idea to catch on.

One last note. The best part of the STEPPS framework is that anyone can use it. It doesn’t require a huge advertising budget, marketing genius, or some sort of creativity gene. Yes, the viral videos and contagious content we’ve talked about were created by particular individuals, but not all of them were famous or could boast ten thousand followers on Twitter. They relied on one or more of the six key STEPPS and this made their products and ideas more contagious.

Social Currency

Does talking about your product or idea make people look good? Can you find the inner remarkability? Leverage game mechanics? Make people feel like insiders?



Triggers

Consider the context. What cues make people think about your product or idea? How can you grow the habitat and make it come to mind more often?



Emotion

Focus on feelings. Does talking about your product or idea generate emotion? How can you kindle the fire?



Public

Does your product or idea advertise itself? Can people see when others are using it? If not, how can you make the private public? Can you create behavioral residue that sticks around even after people use it?



Practical Value

Does talking about your product or idea help people help others? How can you highlight incredible value, packaging your knowledge and expertise into useful information others will want to disseminate?



Stories

What is your Trojan Horse? Is your product or idea embedded in a broader narrative that people want to share? Is the story not only viral, but also valuable?



Howard Wein needed a way to help a new restaurant break through the clutter, a way to raise awareness while staying true to the Barclay Prime brand. The hundred-dollar cheesesteak did just that. It not only provided a remarkable (Social Currency), surprising (Emotion) narrative (Story) but also illustrated the type of quality product that the steakhouse offered (Practical Value). And the prevalence of cheesesteaks in Philadelphia offered ready reminders for people to pass it on (Triggers). The hundred-dollar cheesesteak got people talking and helped make Barclay Prime a rousing success.

George Wright had almost no marketing budget. He needed a way to generate buzz about a product most people wouldn’t ordinarily talk about: a blender. By thinking about what made his product compelling and wrapping that idea in a broader narrative, he was able to generate hundreds of millions of views and boost sales. The Will It Blend? clips are amazing (Emotion) and remarkable (Social Currency). But by making the product’s benefits (Practical Value) integral to a broader narrative (Stories), the videos provided a perfect Trojan horse to get people talking about an everyday household appliance and make Blendtec catch on.

Regular people with regular products and ideas. But by harnessing the psychology of word of mouth, they were able to make their products and ideas succeed.

Throughout the book we’ve discussed cutting-edge science about how word of mouth and social influence work. If you follow these six key STEPPS, you can make any product or idea contagious.





Acknowledgments


Whenever I said I was writing a book, people often asked whether anyone was helping me. While I did not have a co-author, that question was tough to answer because this book would never have reached fruition without countless people’s help.

First, I want to thank my various collaborators over the years. People like Ezgi Akpinar, Eric Bradlow, Dave Balter and the team at BzzAgent, Gráinne Fitzsimons, Raghu Iyengar, Ed Keller and the folks at Keller Fay Group, Blake McShane, Katy Milkman, Eric Schwartz, and Morgan Ward, without whom the papers I discussed in the book would not have been possible. Bright students like Rebecca Greenblatt, Diana Jiang, Lauren McDevitt, Geneva Long, Keri Taub, and Jennifer Wu helped support these projects. Malcolm Gladwell wrote the amazing book that sent me down this road. Anna Mastri pushed me to be a better writer, and books by Seth Godin, Stanley Lieberson, Everett Rogers, Emanuel Rosen, Thomas Schelling, and Jonathan Weiner inspired me to pursue this line of research. A debt of gratitude also goes out to people like Glenn Moglen, who introduced me to academic research; Emily Pronin, who introduced me to social psychology; Noah Mark, who introduced me to sociology; and Lee Ross and Itamar Simonson, who said to always shoot for big ideas. Thanks also to all my colleagues at Wharton and Stanford and all the teachers and staff at Montgomery Blair High School and Takoma Park Middle School who taught me, and thousands of other lucky kids, about the wonders of math and science.

Second, I want to thank the people who made the book itself possible. Dan Ariely, Dan Gilbert, and Sarah Lehrer helped me understand what writing a book really meant. Alice LaPlante sharpened the writing. Jim Levine and all of his colleagues at Levine Greenberg Literary Agency were guiding lights throughout the process. Jonathan Karp, Bob Bender, Tracey Guest, Richard Rhorer, Michael Accordino, and the rest of the team at Simon & Schuster helped form these ideas into a real book. Anthony Cafaro, Colleen Chorak, Ken Craig, Ben Fischman, Denise Grady, Koreen Johannessen, Scott MacEachern, Jim Meehan, Tim Piper, Ken Segall, Brian Shebairo, Howard Wein, and George Wright took the time to share their stories with me. Various Wharton Executive EMBA students were nice enough to provide feedback on the draft. The UPenn lunchtime soccer crew provided a welcome break from writing. Maria Ana brought an eagle eye to revising. My brother, Fred, Danny, and the whole Bruno family not only gave feedback on the drafts but reminded me why I was doing all of this in the first place.

A few more people deserve special note. First, to Chip, who not only has been an advisor, mentor, and friend, but has taught me most of what I know about writing and research: I cannot thank you enough. Second, to Jordan for sticking through the process with me and being both a thoughtful editor and a tireless champion, depending on what was needed. Third, to my parents, Diane Arkin and Jeffrey Berger, not only for reading and supporting this project, but for laying the groundwork to make it all possible. And finally, to my grandmother. For kicking off this journey and supporting me along the way.





Contagious: Why Things Catch On

By Jonah Berger

Simon & Schuster Readers Group Guide

What makes products and ideas catch on and become popular? Why do some stories get shared more than others? Why are some rumors infectious? What makes things “go viral”?

In Contagious, Jonah Berger shares the secret science behind social transmission. Why we talk about and share some things rather than others. Why we pass things on. Filled with engaging stories and comprehensive research Contagious is an essential tool for anyone that wants to make their product or idea spread.





QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION

1) Consider and discuss the most recent email forward you received. It might have been a news article, video, or story. What aspects of the STEPPS framework did it adhere to? Do the same analysis for the last viral video you watched, hot restaurant you tried, hit movie you saw, etc. Which concepts in the framework apply?

2) Which examples that Berger mentioned (e.g., Blendtec, Dove’s Evolution, white iPhone earbuds) had you been aware of before the book? Trace how these cultural touchstones came to you.

3) Discuss and analyze something you do using the lens of game mechanics. What makes that game, club, website, community, or activity so engaging? Consider each of the STEPPS. What keeps you hooked? Also, why do we value achievement so much? Where is an area you’ve noticed yourself being motivated by it?

4) Can mundane things (like a blender) really diffuse through public consciousness as quickly as remarkable things can? Does sensationalism or novelty (inherent remarkability) carry an advantage, even when STEPPS are considered?

5) What is an example where you’ve noticed yourself being motivated by scarcity? New high tech devices (new phones, gadgets, etc.) are frequently scarce when they are released. Does possession of these products carry social currency? Does their frequent release (a veritable flooding of the market) make them less scarce?

6) Would you brave the phone lines to enter Please Don't Tell? What about its seclusion appeals to you? Is there also something that turns you off to the fight for a seat?

7) Compare an instance of ongoing and immediate word of mouth. Is one more powerful than the other?

8) Without thinking too hard, what is currently top of mind for you? Can you identify triggers is your own life that bring things to mind? For example, whenever I see or hear __________ I think about ____________.

9) Like the Mars Bar and Rebecca Black's Friday, discuss products or campaigns that have "natural" triggers. Does having a pre-existing "habitat" increase likelihood of sharing? Of purchase?

10) Discuss high-arousal versus low-arousal emotions. What are some examples of each that you’ve noticed in your own lives? Is it strange that "contentment" (which so many people strive for in every day life) elicits little arousal? Have you ever shared something sad?

11) Privacy is a paramount concern in today's information-driven digital era. How does this fit with the idea of making the private public? (Consider Movember, Hotmail, and the Facebook generation.). When do we want our choices and opinions to be public versus private? Where are the lines drawn between open and closed information?

12) Watch Tim Piper/Dove’s Evolution video. Discuss the idea of Trojan Horses and how emotion is coded into the narrative of ideas.

13) Which aspect of STEPPS do you think is most affective? Compare Berger’s various examples of Social Currency, Triggers, Emotions, Public, Practical Value, and Stories. Is one of these characteristics most important for driving sharing? Is there a specific combination that makes one thing more appealing than another?





EXPAND YOUR BOOK CLUB

1. Perform an experiment and monitor the “most emailed” section of NYTimes.com for a week. Do you begin to notice patterns in what is shared? Consider arousal emotions, practical value, and the very subject matter of the articles.

2. Keep a transmission journal and note the ways in which products, ideas, campaigns, and companies use the tenets of human behavioral sharing to make their wares “stick” and “spread.” How much of your life is subject to the basic STEPPS?

3. Create your own viral video with the STEPPS in mind. What are the challenges of making something that addresses all of these sharing factors? Track the success of your video and how people react. Have you cracked the code to viral content?





A CONVERSATION WITH JONAH BERGER

1. The Harvard neuro study revealing that sharing is rewarding in the same way as food and other high-pleasure reward was incredibly interesting. Taking this into consideration, how do you explain what is referred to as the “me” generation of Twitter and Facebook, in which individuals share the most minute aspects of their everyday lives. Are all generations focused on “me?” Is there something different going on in modernity?

People have always thought about and cared about themselves, but social media makes this easier to see because it creates a written record of our actions. What we said, what we shared, and what we “like.” But research suggests that these methods of communication may also contribute to making us “me” focused. Computer mediated communication, and talking to large groups (rather than a single other), may focus us more on ourselves and less on the wants and needs of others.

2. What’s the most recent thing you shared? And what was most recently shared with you?

Wow. Good question. One thing I recently shared was a New York Times article that has a quote related to a research project we’re working on. One thing I just received was a restaurant recommendation for good Asian fried chicken. I had talked about something related in a Financial Times article about brand extensions, and someone who read the article sent me a note to prove me wrong!

3. Do you think you’ve cracked the code of efficient product advertising? Would you ever try your hand at it?

Can we make ads more effective and viral? Yes. Have we “cracked the code”? There is always more to learn. Definitely like trying my hand at it. I often help companies use the STEPPS framework to improve their products and ideas and it is always lots of fun.

4. Along those same lines, have any of your students gone on to become successful advertisers/viral video makers/idea-spreaders?

Definitely. I teach an exercise in my class where students use the STEPPS framework to try and create a viral video. It’s tough but some people do amazingly well!

5. Discuss how you think sharing today compares to sharing 30 years ago. What about our digital culture has made things different? Has sharing decreased in any way?

Sharing today is certainly different in some ways. There is less face-to-face interaction with our friends and family, so we talk more over the phone or through the web. Research shows that this decreases some of the benefits of social interaction. Warm interpersonal contact reduces stress, but things like texting don’t have the same effect. Do we share less? Doubtful, but we do share differently.

6. The nature of current commercials seems more and more “off-brand,” as companies create non-sequitur and nonsensical ads to elicit a laugh or capitalize on “irony.” Are they failing to follow the STEPPS? Is there remarkability to silliness un-related to product? (Unlike the Panda in the food store).

Funny ads are great. And as a consumer, I love to watch them. But if the goal is not just to make people laugh, but to get them to buy something, then valuable virality becomes vital. People will share funny or ironic ads, but at the end of the day it doesn’t help the company if the consumer has no idea what the ad was for.

7. Do you think most STEPPS happen at the unconscious level, or do you believe people create things with these fundamental human behaviors in mind?

People are more aware of some of the STEPPS than others. Practical Value? We see that every day. Social Currency? We see it in others all the time (even if it’s hard to see in ourselves). But we are less aware of how Triggers or Public affects our behavior.

8. Is there something to be said for over-saturation? Can a good method of viral sharing exhaust itself in our fast-as-lightning culture?

There is a key difference between psychology and marketing tactics. We may get over-saturated with a particular tactic (e.g., pop-up ads or a certain style of ad) but the underlying psychology that drove us to like it still remains. If every company makes their product “scarce” consumers will start to catch on, but does that mean we’ll stop valuing scarcity altogether? Probably not.

9. Is one element of STEPPS more vital than the others?

No one of the STEPPS is most important, but certain ones are definitely easier to apply in certain situations. It’s easier to leverage Public if you have a physical product. It’s easier to use Emotion if you sell something related to children or animals. But the key is not just using the easy STEPPS. Trying to incorporate the more difficult ones will really boost their impact.

10. Have you ever eaten the $100 cheesesteak at Barclay’s?

Yes. I highly recommend it.





© DEBORAH FEINGOLD

JONAH BERGER is the James G. Campbell Assistant Professor of Marketing at The Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. He has published dozens of articles in top-tier academic journals, and popular accounts of his work have appeared in places like The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, The Washington Post, Science, Harvard Business Review, Wired, BusinessWeek, and Fast Company. His research has also been featured in The New York Times Magazine’s annual “Year in Ideas” issue. Berger has been recognized with awards for both scholarship and teaching, including being named Wharton’s “Iron Prof.” He lives in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

MEET THE AUTHORS, WATCH VIDEOS AND MORE AT

SimonandSchuster.com

JACKET DESIGN BY BEN WISEMAN

JACKET PHOTOGRAPH BY GETTY

COPYRIGHT © 2013 SIMON & SCHUSTER





We hope you enjoyed reading this Simon & Schuster eBook.



* * *



Join our mailing list and get updates on new releases, deals, bonus content and other great books from Simon & Schuster.



CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP





or visit us online to sign up at

eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com





Notes


Introduction: Why Things Catch On


Sixty percent are gone: www.econ.ucsb.edu/~tedb/Courses/Ec1F07/restaurantsfail.pdf.

“It was like eating gold”: Taken from Barclay Prime’s Yelp page, http://www.yelp.com/biz/barclay-prime-philadelphia.

Most restaurants bomb: Shane, Scott (2008), “Startup Failure Rates—The REAL numbers,” Small Business Trends, April 28, http://smallbiztrends.com/2008/04/startup-failure-rates.html.

People share more than 16,000 words: See Mehl, Matthais R., Simine Vazire, Nairan Ramirez-Esparza, Richard B. Slatcher, and James W. Pennebaker (2007), “Are Women Really More Talkative Than Men?” Science 317, 82.

100 million conversations about brands: see Keller, Ed, and Barak Libai (2009), “A Holistic Approach to the Measurement of WOM,” presentation at ESOMAR Worldwide Media Measurement Conference, Stockholm (May 4–6).

We try websites our neighbors recommend: see Trusov, Michael, Randolph E. Bucklin, and Koen Pauwels (2009), “Effects of Word-of-Mouth Versus Traditional Marketing: Findings from an Internet Social Networking Site,” Journal of Marketing 73 (September), 90–102.

Word of mouth is the primary factor: Bughin, Jacques, Jonathan Doogan, and Ole Jørgen Vetvik (2010), “A New Way to Measure Word-of-Mouth Marketing,” McKinsey Quarterly (white paper).

Goel, Watts, and Goldstein 2012: “The Structure of Online Diffusion Networks,” Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce (EC ’12).

$200 increase in restaurant sales: see Godes, David, and Dina Mayzlin (2009), “Firm-Created Word-of-Mouth Communication: Evidence from a Field Study,” Marketing Science 28, no. 4, 721–39.

twenty more books sold: Chevalier, Judith, and Dina Mayzlin (2006), “The Effect of Word of Mouth on Sales: Online Book Reviews,” Journal of Marketing Research 43, no. 3, 345–54.

Doctors are more likely: Iyengar, Raghuram, Christophe Van den Bulte, and Thomas W. Valente (2011), “Opinion Leadership and Social Contagion in New Product Diffusion,” Marketing Science 30, no. 2, 195–212.

People are more likely: Christakis, Nicholas A., and James Fowler (2009), Connected: The Surprising Power of Our Social Networks and How They Shape Our Lives (New York: Little, Brown and Company).

while traditional advertising is still useful: Stephen, Andrew, and Jeff Galak (2012), “The Effects of Traditional and Social Earned Media on Sales: A Study of a Microlending Marketplace,” Journal of Marketing Research (forthcoming); Trusov, Bucklin, and Pauwels, “Effects of Word-of-Mouth Versus Traditional Marketing.”

customers referred by their friends: Schmitt, Philipp, Bernd Skiera, and Christophe Van den Bulte (2011), “Referral Programs and Customer Value,” Journal of Marketing 75 (January), 46–59. See also http://techcrunch.com/2011/11/27/social-proof-why-people-like-to-follow-the-crowd.

Millions of people use these sites: Eridon, Corey (2011), “25 Billion Pieces of Content Get Shared on Facebook Monthly,” Hubspot Blog, December 2, http://blog.hubspot.com/blog/tabid/6307/bid/29407/25-Billion-Pieces-of-Content-Get-Shared-on-Facebook-Monthly-INFOGRAPHIC.aspx.

The actual number is 7 percent: This book provides a really nice perspective on the importance of face-to-face word of mouth: Keller, Ed, and Brad Fay (2012), The Face-to-Face Book: Why Real Relationships Rule in a Digital Marketplace (New York: Free Press).

Close to two hours a day: See http://news.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-10421016-93.html.

the average tweet: Arthur, Charles (2009), “Average Twitter User has 126 Followers, and Only 20% of Users Go via Website,” The Guardian, March 29, http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/blog/2009/jun/29/twitter-users-average-api-traffic.

offline discussions are more prevalent: When thinking about whether online or offline word of mouth will be more effective, also think about where the desired action is taking place. If you’re trying to get people to check out a website, then online word of mouth is great because the desired action is only a click away. The same thing is true with offline products or behaviors. Online word of mouth about pasta sauce is great, but people need to remember to buy it when they’re actually in the store, so offline word of mouth may be even better. Also think about whether and where people do research before they buy. While most people buy a car offline, they do a lot of research online and may make their decision before they ever step into the dealership. In those instances, online word of mouth may sway their decision.

Only one-third of 1 percent: See http://articles.businessinsider.com/2009-05-20/tech/30027787_1_tubemogul-videos-viral-hits.

“by the efforts”: Gladwell, Malcolm (2000), The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference (New York: Little, Brown).

“one in 10 Americans”: Keller, Ed, and Jon Berry (2003), The Influentials: One American in Ten Tells the Other Nine How to Vote, Where to Eat, and What to Buy (New York: Free Press).

making things go viral: Right now there is little good empirical evidence that people who have more social ties or who are more persuasive have a bigger impact on what catches on. See Bakshy, Eytan, Jake Hofman, Winter A. Mason, and Duncan J. Watts (2011), “Everyone’s an Influencer: Quantifying Influence on Twitter,” Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, Hong Kong; see also Watts, Duncan J., and Peter S. Dodds (2007), “Networks, Influence, and Public Opinion Formation,” Journal of Consumer Research 34, no. 4, 441–58. Think about the last story someone told you that you passed on. Did you share it because the person who told you was really popular? Or because the story itself was so funny or surprising? Think about the last news article someone sent you that you forwarded on to someone else. Did you pass it along because the person who sent it was particularly persuasive? Or because you knew someone else would be interested in the information the story contained? In these and most other cases, the driving force behind word of mouth is the message, not the messenger.

Tom Dickson was looking for a new job: Sauer, Patrick J. (2008), “Confessions of a Viral Video Superstar,” Inc. magazine, June 19. Go to http://jonahberger.com to see Tom blending an iPhone.

in 1999 Blendtec was founded: See http://donteattheshrimp.com/2007/07/03/will-it-blend-gets-blendtec-in-the-wsj/ and http://magazine.byu.edu/?act=view&a=2391 for some good discussions of the early years at Blendtec.





1. Social Currency


Brian decided: Interviews with Brian Shebairo on May 16, 2012, and Jim Meehan on May 13, 2012.

40 percent of what people talk about: Dunbar, Robert I. M., Anna Marriott, and N. D. C. Duncan (1997), “Human Conversational Behavior,” Human Nature 8, no. 3, 231–44.

half of tweets are “me” focused: Naaman, Mor, Jeffrey Boase, and Chih-Hui Lai (2010), “Is It Really About Me? Message Content in Social Awareness Streams,” Proceedings of the ACM Conference, 189–92.

Jason Mitchell and Diana Tamir: Tamir, Diana I., and Jason P. Mitchell (2012), “Disclosing Information About the Self Is Intrinsically Rewarding,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109, no. 21, 8038–43.

We make educated guesses: See Berger, Jonah, and Chip Heath (2008), “Who Drives Divergence? Identity Signaling, Outgroup Dissimilarity, and the Abandonment of Cultural Tastes,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 95, no. 3, 593–605. See also Berger, Jonah, and Chip Heath (2007), “Where Consumers Diverge from Others: Identity Signaling and Product Domains,” Journal of Consumer Research 34, no. 2, 121–34, for discussions of research in this area.

Prada handbag: Wojnicki, Andrea C., and Dave Godes (2010), “Word-of-Mouth as Self-Enhancement,” University of Toronto working paper. See also De Angelis, Matteo, Andrea Bonezzi, Alessandro Peluso, Derek Rucker, and Michele Costabile (2012), “On Braggarts and Gossips: A Self-Enhancement Account of Word-of-Mouth Generation and Transmission,” Journal of Marketing Research, forthcoming.

Something “out of the ordinary”: For a discussion of the story behind Snapple facts, see http://mittelmitte.blogspot.com/2006/09/snapple-real-facts-are-100-true.html and http://mysnapplerealfacts.blogspot.com/.

Wharton professor Raghu Iyengar: Berger, Jonah, and Raghuram Iyengar (2013), “How Interest Shapes Word-of-Mouth over Different Channels,” Wharton working paper.

More interesting tweets: Bakshy, Eytan, Jake M. Hofman, Winter A. Mason, and Duncan J. Watts (2011), “Everyone’s an Influencer: Quantifying Influence on Twitter,” WSDM, 65–74. See also Berger, Jonah, and Katherine Milkman (2012), “What Makes Online Content Viral,” Journal of Marketing Research 49, no. 2, 192–205.

psychologists from the University of Illinois: Burrus, Jeremy, Justin Kruger, and Amber Jurgens (2006), “The Truth Never Stands in the Way of a Good Story: The Distortion of Stories in the Service of Entertainment,” University of Illinois working paper.

One way to generate surprise: Heath, Chip, and Dan Heath (2011), Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and Others Die (New York: Random House).

Mysteries and controversy: Ibid. See also Chen, Zoey, and Jonah Berger (2012), “When, Why, and How Controversy Causes Conversation,” Wharton working paper.

Shot on a handheld camera: Details about The Blair Witch Project can be found at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Blair_Witch_Project.

black toilet paper: Information about Renova, the Portuguese company that makes colored toilet paper, can be found at http://www.renovaonline.net/_global/.

180 million people: The facts about frequent flier programs came from http://www.frequentflyerservices.com/press_room/facts_and_stats/frequent_flyer_facts.php and http://www.prweb.com/releases/2011/11/prweb8925371.htm.

discrete markers motivate us: Information about how goals can act as reference points and how discrete progress markers can affect motivation can be found in: Heath, Chip, Richard P. Larrick, and George Wu (1999), “Goals as Reference Points,” Cognitive Psychology 38, 79–109; Amir, On, and Dan Ariely (2008), “Resting on Laurels: The Effects of Discrete Progress Markers as Sub-goals on Task Performance and Preferences,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 34, no. 5, 1158–71; and Kivetz, Ran, Oleg Urminsky, and Yuhuang Zheng (2006), “The Goal-Gradient Hypothesis Resurrected: Purchase Acceleration, Illusionary Goal Progress, and Customer Retention,” Journal of Marketing Research 43, no. 1, 39–56.

By increasing motivation, the cards: Kivetz, Ran, Oleg Urminsky, and Yuhuang Zheng (2006), “The Goal-Gradient Hypothesis Resurrected: Purchase Acceleration, Illusionary Goal Progress, and Customer Retention,” Journal of Marketing Research, 43 (February), 39–58.

They preferred to do better: Solnick, S. J., and D. Hemenway (1998), “Is More Always Better? A Survey on Positional Concerns.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 37, 373–83.

the contest helped drive sales: Information about Burberry’s “Art of the Trench” campaign can be found at http://blogs.wsj.com/source/2010/01/19/burberry%E2%80%99s-trench-website-too-good-to-be-true/ and http://www.1to1media.com/weblog/2010/01/internet_marketing_from_the_tr.html.

“It’s like the concierge”: Interview with Ben Fischman on June 12, 2012. Thanks to Dave Balter for introducing me to this great story.

If something is difficult to obtain: For a discussion of how effort influences inferences of value, see Aronson, Elliot (1997), “The Theory of Cognitive Dissonance: The Evolution and Vicissitudes of an Idea,” in The Message of Social Psychology: Perspectives on Mind in Society, ed. Craig McGarty and S. Alexander Haslam (Malden, Mass.: Blackwell Publishing), 20–35; and Aronson, Elliot, and Judson Mills (1959), “The Effect of Severity of Initiation on Liking for a Group,” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 66, no. 6, 584–88. See also Sela, Aner, and Jonah Berger (2011), “Decision Quicksand: How Trivial Choices Suck Us In,” Journal of Consumer Research, 39.

People evaluate cookbooks: There are a number of valuable papers on how scarcity affects value. See Verhallen, Theo (1982), “Scarcity and Consumer Choice Behavior,” Journal of Economic Psychology 2, 299–322; Worchel, S., J. Lee, and A. Adewole (1975), “Effects of Supply and Demand on Ratings of Object Value,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 32, 906–14; Fromkin, H. L., J. C. Olson, R. L. Dipboye, and D. Barnaby (1971), “A Commodity Theory Analysis of Consumer Preferences for Scarce Products,” Proceedings 79th Annual Convention of the American Psychological Association, 1971, pp. 653–54.

Chicken McNuggets: Thanks to Dave Balter for telling me about the McRib locator. For background details on the story, see http://www.maxim.com/funny/the-cult-of-the-mcrib-0 and http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/McRib.

as soon as you pay people: For early (and extremely clever) research on intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, see Lepper, Mark R., David Greene, and Richard E. Nisbett (1973), “Undermining Children’s Intrinsic Interest with Extrinsic Reward: A Test of the ‘Overjustification’ Hypothesis,” Journal of Social and Personality Psychology 28, no. 1, 129–37. For a more recent treatment, see Heyman, James, and Dan Ariely (2004), “Effort for Payment: A Tale of Two Markets,” Psychological Science 15, no. 11, 787–93.





2. Triggers


“Nobody talks about boring companies”: Sernovitz, Andy (2006), Word of Mouth Marketing: How Smart Companies Get People Talking (Chicago: Kaplan Publishing).

People talk about Cheerios: The finding that Honey Nut Cheerios get more word of mouth than Walt Disney World comes from the BzzAgent analysis we discuss in this chapter: Berger, Jonah, and Eric Schwartz (2011), “What Drives Immediate and Ongoing Word-of-Mouth?” Journal of Marketing, October, 869–80. The finding also comes from Twitter data on the frequency with which these two brands are discussed.

sixteen word-of-mouth episodes: Carl, Walter (2006), “What’s All the Buzz About? Everyday Communication and the Relational Basis of Word-of-Mouth and Buzz Marketing Practices,” Management Communication Quarterly 19, 601–34.

American consumers mention specific brands: Keller, Ed, and Barak Libai (2009), “A Holistic Approach to the Measurement of WOM,” presentation at ESOMAR Worldwide Media Measurement Conference, Stockholm (May 4–6).

Dave gave my colleague Eric Schwartz: This included information about the product in each campaign and the number of BzzReports each BzzAgent submitted. We were especially interested in the fact that we could analyze the buzz generated by each product by agent. After all, certain people might share more word of mouth than others: Chatty Cathys talk more than Quiet Quentins. But by looking at how much individual agents talked across different campaigns, we could identify patterns. We could see whether an agent talked more about a coffee brand than a new type of digital camera. And we could start to understand why certain products got more word of mouth than others. Not just whether people talked about certain product categories (such as food) more than others (such as movies), but what really drives discussion in the first place—the psychology of talk.

some thoughts are more top of mind: Accessibility is a huge topic in psychology; for some classic research on the topic, see Higgins, E. Tory, and G. King (1981), “Accessibility of Social Constructs: Information-processing Consequences of Individual and Contextual Variability,” in Personality, Cognition, and Social Interaction, ed. N. Cantor and J. F. Kihlstrom (Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum), 60–81; and Wyer, Robert S., and T. K. Srull (1981), “Category Accessibility: Some Theoretical and Empirical Issues Concerning the Processing of Social Stimulus Information,” in Social Cognition: The Ontario Symposium, vol. 1, ed. E. T. Higgins, C. P. Herman, and M. P. Zanna (Hillsdale, N. J.: Lawrence Erlbaum), 161–97.

Some things are chronically accessible: For an early paper on chronic accessibility, see Bargh, John A., W. J. Lombardi, and E. Tory Higgins (1988), “Automaticity of Chronically Accessible Constructs in Person X Situation Effects on Person Perception: It’s Just a Matter of Time,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 55, no. 4, 599–605.

stimuli in the surrounding environment: There is a huge literature on stimuli in the environment and spreading activation, but for some classics, see Anderson, John R. (1983), The Architecture of Cognition (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press); Collins, Allan M., and Elizabeth F. Loftus (1975), “A Spreading-Activation Theory of Semantic Processing,” Psychological Review 82, no. 6, 407–28; and Higgins, Tory E., William S. Rholes, and Carl R. Jones (1977), “Category Accessibility and Impression Formation,” Journal of Social Psychology 13 (March), 141–54. For examples in a consumption context, see Nedungadi, P. (1990), “Recall and Consumer Consideration Sets: Influencing Choice Without Altering Brand Evaluations,” Journal of Consumer Research 17, no. 3, 263–76; and Berger, Jonah, and Gráinne M. Fitzsimons (2008), “Dogs on the Street, Pumas on Your Feet: How Cues in the Environment Influence Product Evaluation and Choice,” Journal of Marketing Research 45, no. 1, 1–14.

the candy company Mars: White, Michael (1997), “Toy Rover Sales Soar into Orbit: Mars Landing Puts Gold Shine Back into Space Items,” Arizona Republic, July 12A, E1.

Music researchers Adrian North: North, Adrian C., David J. Hargreaves, and Jennifer McKendrick (1997), “In-Store Music Affects Product Choice,” Nature 390 (November), 132.

Psychologist Gráinne Fitzsimons: Berger and Fitzsimons, “Dogs on the Street,” 1–14.

people possess core beliefs: Riker, William, and Peter Ordeshook (1968), “A Theory of the Calculus of Voting,” American Political Science Review 62, no. 1, 25–42.

Arizona’s 2000 general election: Berger, Jonah, Marc Meredith, and S. Christian Wheeler (2008), “Contextual Priming: Where People Vote Affects How They Vote,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105, no. 26, 8846–49.

Rebecca’s parents paid four thousand dollars: Details about Rebecca Black came from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rebecca_Black.

Triggers boost word of mouth: Also see Rosen, Emanuel (2003), Anatomy of Buzz (London: Profile Books), for a nice related discussion of triggers.

More frequently triggered products: Berger, Jonah, and Eric Schwartz (2011), “What Drives Immediate and Ongoing Word-of-Mouth?” Journal of Marketing, October, 869–80.

analyzed hundreds of New York Times book reviews: Berger, Jonah, Alan T. Sorensen, and Scott J. Rasmussen (2010), “Positive Effects of Negative Publicity: When Negative Reviews Increase Sales,” Marketing Science 29, no. 5, 815–27.

the Kit Kat tune: Details about Kit Kat’s history came from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kit_Kat. Details about the coffee campaign came from an interview with Colleen Chorak on February 9, 2012.

one of the top ten “earworms”: Details about the “Give me a Break” song being an earworm came from Kellaris, James (2003), “Dissecting Earworms: Further Evidence on the ‘Song-Stuck-in-Your Head’ Phenomenon,” presentation to the Society for Consumer Psychology. See also http://www.webmd.com/mental-health/news/20030227/songs-stick-in-everyones-head.

ideas also have habitats: Berger, Jonah, and Chip Heath (2005), “Idea Habitats: How the Prevalence of Environmental Cues Influences the Success of Ideas,” Cognitive Science 29, no. 2, 195–221.

an experiment we conducted with BzzAgent and Boston Market: Berger and Schwartz, “What Drives Immediate and Ongoing Word-of-Mouth?” 869–80.

“Bob, I’ve got emphysema”: See http://no-smoke.org/images/02_Bob_14x48.jpg.

the poison parasite: Cialdini, Robert B., Petia Petrova, Linda Demaine, Daniel Barrett, Brad Sagarin, Jon Manner, and Kelton Rhoads (2005), “The Poison Parasite Defense: A Strategy for Sapping a Stronger Opponent’s Persuasive Strength,” University of Arizona working paper.

Anheuser-Busch revised the slogan: Cialdini, Robert B. (2001), Influence: Science and Practice (Needham Heights, Mass.: Allyn & Bacon).

Poke too many holes: Information about the fan effect can be found in Anderson, John R. (1974), “Retrieval of Propositional Information from Long-term Memory,” Cognitive Psychology 6, 451–74; and Anderson, John R. (1983), The Architecture of Cognition (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press).

out spills fat: To see the Department of Health’s campaign in action, visit http://jonahberger.com.

products associated with the color orange: Berger and Fitzsimons, “Dogs on the Street,” 1–14.

you’ll notice a neat pattern: Thanks to Scott A. Golder for providing these data.





3. Emotion


schlieren photography: Grady’s article about the cough can be found at Grady, Denise (2008), “The Mysterious Cough, Caught on Film,” New York Times, October 27; http://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/28/science/28cough.html. The New England Journal of Medicine article on which her piece is based is Tang, Julian W., and Gary S. Settles (2008), “Coughing and Aerosols,” New England Journal of Medicine 359, 15.

That doesn’t really tell us much: Not surprisingly, external factors like where an article was featured also correlated with whether an article made the list. Articles that appeared on the front page of the physical newspaper were shared more than those placed inside. Articles featured at the top of the Times home page were shared more than those buried several clicks into the website. Articles written by U2’s Bono or former senator Bob Dole were shared more often than articles written by less famous authors. But these relationships are neither that surprising nor that helpful. Buying a Super Bowl ad or hiring Bono will help increase the chance that content gets viewed and shared. Most people, however, don’t have the funding or personal connections to make those things happen. Instead, we focused on aspects of the content itself that were linked to sharing.

More useful articles: A full description of our research on The New York Times Most E-Mailed list, as well as our findings, can be found in Berger, Jonah, and Katherine Milkman (2012), “What Makes Online Content Viral,” Journal of Marketing Research 49, no. 2, 192–205.

awe is the sense of wonder: For a great overview article on awe, see Keltner, D., and J. Haidt (2003), “Approaching Awe, a Moral, Spiritual, and Aesthetic Emotion,” Cognition and Emotion, 17, 297–314. For a more recent empirical treatment, see Shiota, M. N., D. Keltner, and A. Mossman (2007), “The Nature of Awe: Elicitors, Appraisals, and Effects on Self-concept,” Cognition and Emotion 21, 944–63.

“The most beautiful emotion”: The Einstein quote comes from Ulam, S. M., Françoise Ulam, and Jan Myielski (1976), Adventures of a Mathematician (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons), 289.

Awe-inspiring articles: Berger and Milkman, “What Makes Online Content Viral,” 192–205.

Susan Boyle’s first appearance: Susan Boyle’s performance can be found at http://jonahberger.com.

helps deepen our social connection: For a discussion of how the social sharing of emotion deepens social bonds, see Peters, Kim, and Yoshihasa Kashima (2007), “From Social Talk to Social Action: Shaping the Social Triad with Emotion Sharing,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 93, no. 5, 780–97.

negative content should be more viral: For a discussion of positive and negative word of mouth, see Godes, Dave, Yubo Chen, Sanjiv Das, Chrysanthos Dellarocas, Bruce Pfeiffer, et al. (2005), “The Firm’s Management of Social Interactions,” Marketing Letters 16, nos. 3–4, 415–28.

psychologist Jamie Pennebaker: A discussion of linguistic inquiry and word count can be found in: Pennebaker, James W., Roger J. Booth, and Martha E. Francis (2007), “Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count: LIWC2007,” accessed October 14, 2011; http://www.liwc.net/. For a review of how LIWC has been used to study a range of psychological processes, see Pennebaker, James W., Matthias R. Mehl, and Katie Niederhoffer (2003), “Psychological Aspects of Natural Language Use: Our Words, Our Selves,” Annual Review of Psychology 54, 547–77.

the amount of positivity and negativity: The greater the percentage of emotional words in a passage of text, the more emotion it tends to express. Pennebaker, J. W., and M. E. Francis (1996), “Cognitive, Emotional, and Language Processes in Disclosure,” Cognition and Emotion 10, 601–26.

newcomers falling in love with New York City: Berger and Milkman, “What Makes Online Content Viral,” 192–205.

Articles that evoked anger or anxiety: Ibid.

physiological arousal: A great deal of research in psychology has examined the so-called two-dimensional theory of affect (valence and arousal). For discussions, see Barrett, Lisa Feldman, and James A. Russell (1999), “The Structure of Current Affect: Controversies and Emerging Consensus,” Current Directions in Psychological Science 8, no. 1, 10–14; Christie, I. C., and B. H. Friedman (2004), “Autonomic Specificity of Discrete Emotion and Dimensions of Affective Space: A Multivariate Approach,” International Journal of Psychophysiology 51, 143–53; and Schlosberg, H. (1954), “Three Dimensions of Emotion,” Psychological Review 61, no. 2, 81–88.

This is arousal: For a discussion of the neurobiology of arousal, see Heilman, K. M. (1997), “The Neurobiology of Emotional Experience,” Journal of Neuropsychiatry 9, 439–48.

funny content is shared: The result that arousal boosts social transmission can be found in Berger, Jonah (2011), “Arousal Increases Social Transmission of Information,” Psychological Science 22, no. 7, 891–93.

While traveling to a gig: A summary of Dave Carroll’s odyssey with United Airlines can be found in his book: Carroll, Dave (2012), United Breaks Guitars: The Power of One Voice in the Age of Social Media (Carlsbad, CA: Hay House). To hear the actual song, go to http://jonahberger.com.

The clip tells a budding love story: A clip of “Parisian Love” can be viewed at http://jonahberger.com. The story behind “Parisian Love” came from an interview with Anthony Cafaro on June 20, 2012.

“The best results don’t show up in a search engine”: The quote came from Iezzi, Teressa (2010), “Meet the Google Five,” http://creativity-online.com/news/the-google-creative-lab/146084.

Simply adding more arousal: Berger and Milkman, “What Makes Online Content Viral,” 192–205.

obesity reduces life expectancy: The statistic about obesity came from Whitlock, Gary, Sarah Lewington, Paul Sherliker, and Richard Peto (2009), “Body-mass Index and Mortality,” The Lancet 374, no. 9684, 114.

disgust is a highly arousing emotion: For a discussion of how disgust affects social transmission, see Heath, Chip, Chris Bell, and Emily Sternberg (2001), “Emotional Selection in Memes: The Case of Urban Legends,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 81, no. 6, 1028–41.

the practice strengthens the maternal bond: To learn more about baby-wearing and attachment, see www.attachmentparenting.org.

the company created an ad centered on the aches: To see a clip of the Motrin ad, see http://jonahberger.com.

the marketing debacle: Learmonth, Michael (2008), “How Twittering Critics Brought Down Motrin Mom Campaign: Bloggers Ignite Brush Fire over Weekend, Forcing J&J to Pull Ads, Issue Apology,” AdAge.com, November 17, retrieved from http://adage.com/article/digital/twittering-critics-brought-motrin-mom-campaign/132622.





4. Public


Ken Segall was Steve Jobs’s right hand man: All taken from my interview with Ken Segall on May, 15, 2012. For more information on Ken’s work with Apple, see Segall (2012), Insanely Simple: The Obsession That Drives Apple’s Success (New York: Portfolio/Penguin).

If lots of people are eating there: For an economist’s take on this issue, see Becker, Gary S. (1991), “A Note on Restaurant Pricing and Other Examples of Social Influence on Price,” Journal of Political Economy 99, no. 3, 1109–16.

pick entrées preferred by other diners: For evidence of social influence in entrée choice, see Cai, Hongbi, Yuyu Chen, and Hanming Fang (2009), “Observational Learning: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Field Experiment,” American Economic Review 99, no. 3, 864–82. For research on conformity in hotel towel use, see Goldstein, Noah J., Robert B. Cialdini, and Vladas Griskevicius (2008), “A Room with a Viewpoint: Using Social Norms to Motivate Environmental Conservation in Hotels,” Journal of Consumer Research 35, 472–82. Similar approaches have also been applied to get people to reduce home energy consumption.

People are more likely to vote: For evidence of social influence in voter turnout, see Nickerson, David W. (2008), “Is Voting Contagious? Evidence from Two Field Experiments,” American Political Science Review 102, 49–57. For a discussion of how social influence may affect obesity and smoking cessation, see Christakis, Nicholas A., and James Fowler (2009), Connected: The Surprising Power of Our Social Networks and How They Shape Our Lives (New York: Little, Brown, and Company).

what brand of coffee to buy: For evidence of social influence in coffee choice, see Burnkrant, Robert E., and Alain Cousineau (1975), “Informational and Normative Social Influence in Buyer Behavior,” Journal of Consumer Research 2, 206–15. For evidence of social influence in paying taxes, see Thaler, Richard (2012), “Watching Behavior Before Writing the Rules,” New York Times, July 12, retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/08/business/behavioral-science-can-help-guide-policy-economic-view.html.

people are more likely to laugh: For evidence about social influence in laughter, see Provine, R. R. (1992), “Contagious Laughter: Laughter Is a Sufficient Stimulus for Laughs and Smiles,” Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society 30, 1–4.

“social proof”: Cialdini, Robert B. (2001), Influence: Science and Practice (Needham Heights, Mass.: Allyn & Bacon).

when she looked at hundreds of kidney donations: The findings from Juanjuan’s clever paper, as well as assorted statistics about kidney failure and donation, can be found at Zhang, Juanjuan (2010), “The Sound of Silence: Observational Learning in the U.S. Kidney Market,” Marketing Science 29, no. 2, 315–35.

Koreen Johannessen started: Interview with Koreen Johannessen on June 21, 2012.

college students . . . report drinking alcohol: For some statistics about college students’ binge drinking, see Weschler, Henry, and Toben F. Nelson (2008), “What We Have Learned from the Harvard School of Public Health College Alcohol Study: Focusing Attention on College Student Alcohol Consumption and the Environmental Conditions That Promote It,” Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs 69, 481–90. Also see Hingson, Ralph, Timothy Heeren, Michael Winter, and Henry Wechsler (2005), “Magnitude of Alcohol-Related Mortality and Morbidity Among U.S. College Students Ages 18–24: Changes from 1998 to 2001,” Annual Review of Public Health, 26, 259–79, and http://www.alcohol101plus.org/downloads/collegestudents.pdf.

how they felt about drinking: Psychologists use the term “pluralistic ignorance” to talk about this issue. Pluralistic ignorance refers to a case where most people in a group privately reject a norm (such as drinking a lot) but incorrectly assume that others accept it, in part because they can see others’ behavior but not their thoughts. For a broader discussion, see Prentice, Deborah A., and Dale T. Miller (1993), “Pluralistic Ignorance and Alcohol Use on Campus: Some Consequences of Misperceiving the Social Norm,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 64, no. 2, 243–56.

A restaurant might be extremely popular: This is why the maître d’ will often seat the first few arrivals near the window at the front of the restaurant. As a funny side note, there is a place in New York City that I always assumed was extremely popular because it has benches outside that were always full. I assumed that the people sitting on them were waiting to eat. Only later did I realize that they may have been sitting there because it was a convenient place to rest for a few minutes.

1.5 million car sales: For the full story on our automobile research, see McShane, Blakely, Eric T. Bradlow, and Jonah Berger (2012), “Visual Influence and Social Groups,” Journal of Marketing Research, (forthcoming). Also see Grinblatt, M., M. Keloharrju, and S. Ikaheimo (2008), “Social Influence and Consumption: Evidence from the Automobile Purchases of Neighbors,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 90, no. 4, 735–53.

The easier something is to see: For evidence about how public visibility affects word of mouth, see Berger, Jonah, and Eric Schwartz (2011), “What Drives Immediate and Ongoing Word of Mouth?” Journal of Marketing Research 48, no. 5, 869–80.

cancer claims the lives: For statistics about how cancer affects men, see http://www.cdc.gov/features/cancerandmen/ and http://www.wcrf.org/cancer_statistics/world_cancer_statistics.php.

It all started one Sunday afternoon: For the backstory on the founding of Movember, as well as statistics on its growth and development, see ca.movember.com and http://billabout.com/get-your-mo-on%E2%80%A8interview-adam-garone-movember-founder/.

Johannessen was able to decrease heavy drinking: For a related discussion, see Schroeder, Christine M., and Deborah A. Prentice (1998), “Exposing Pluralistic Ignorance to Reduce Alcohol Use Among College Students,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 28, 2150–80.

350 million users: For basic details and statistics about Hotmail, see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hotmail.

Apple’s white headphone cords stood out: Such visible signals are particularly important in domains where there are network effects, or where the value of a product depends on the number of others who are using it.

it’s called behavioral residue: The term “behavioral residue” comes from psychologist Sam Gosling. For a discussion of his research in the area, see Gosling, Sam (2008), Snoop: What Your Stuff Says About You (New York: Basic Books).

“a stupid idea”: Mickle, Tripp (2009), “Five Strong Years,” Sports Business Daily, September 14, retrieved from http://www.sportsbusinessdaily.com/Journal/Issues/2009/09/20090914/This-Weeks-News/Five-Strong-Years.aspx.

Even Armstrong was incredulous: Carr, Austin (2011), “Lance Armstrong, Doug Ulman Thought the Livestrong Wristband Would Fail,” Fast Company, November 11, retrieved from http://www.fastcompany.com/article/doug-ulman-didnt-think-the-livestrong-bracelets-would-sell.

This public visibility: Many things contributed to making Livestrong bands a success. They cost only a dollar, making it easy for people to try out being part of the movement, even if they weren’t sure they wanted to commit themselves. The wristbands were also really easy to wear. Unlike breast cancer ribbons, which you have to pin on different pieces of clothing, Livestrong bands could be worn all the time. You could wear one all day, keep it on while sleeping, even wear it in the shower. You never had to take it off or remember where you left it. But color also played an important role, as discussed.

“The nice thing about a wristband”: Interview with Scott MacEachern, 2006.

installing these buttons: Gelles, David (2010), “E-commerce Takes an Instant Liking to Facebook Button,” Financial Times, September 21, retrieved from http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/1599be2e-c5a9-11df-ab48-00144feab49a.html.

whether anti-drug ads were actually effective: Hornik, Robert, Lela Jacobsohn, Robert Orwin, Andrea Piesse, and Graham Kalton (2008), “Effects of the National Youth Anti-Drug Media Campaign on Youths,” American Journal of Public Health 98, no. 12, 2229–36.

“30 billion songs were illegally downloaded”: Recording Industry Association of America website, http://www.riaa.com/faq.php, retrieved June 1, 2012.

people who stole petrified wood: Cialdini, Robert B., Linda J. Demaine, Brad J. Sagarin, Daniel W. Barrett, Kelton Rhoads, and Patricia L. Winter (2006), “Managing Social Norms for Persuasive Impact,” Social Influence 1, no. 1, 3–15.





5. Practical Value


If you had to pick someone: Interview with Ken Craig, February 20, 2012. A clip of Ken’s corn trick can be seen at http://jonahberger.com.

Kahneman received the Nobel: For a popular treatment of prospect theory, see Kahneman’s book Thinking, Fast and Slow (2011), from Farrar, Straus and Giroux. For a more academic treatment, see Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky (1979), “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk,” Econometrica 47 (1979), 263–91. Many of the scenarios discussed in this chapter are adapted from Richard Thaler’s work on mental accounting. See Thaler, Richard (1980), “Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 1, 39–60; and Thaler, Richard (1985), “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice,” Marketing Science 4, 199–214.

To test this possibility: Anderson and Simester’s research can be found at Anderson, Eric T., and Duncan I. Simester (2001), “Are Sale Signs Less Effective When More Products Have Them?” Marketing Science 20, no. 2, 121–42.

buy a new clock radio: Adapted from Thaler, “Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice,” 39–60.

While noting something is on sale: A good deal of research has examined how saying something is on sale affects perceived value. For examples, see Blattberg, Robert, Richard A. Briesch, and Edward J. Fox (1995), “How Promotions Work,” Marketing Science 14, no. 3, 122–32; Lattin, James M., and Randolph E. Bucklin (1989), “Reference Effects of Price and Promotion on Brand Choice Behavior,” Journal of Marketing Research 26, no. 3, 299–310; and Raju, Jagmohan S. (1992), “The Effect of Price Promotions on Variability in Product Category Sales,” Marketing Science 11, no. 3, 207–20. For an empirical investigation of how sale signs affect purchase, see Anderson and Simester, “Are Sale Signs Less Effective,” 121–42.

quantity purchase limits increase sales: Inman, Jeffrey J., Anil C. Peter, and Priya Raghubir (1997), “Framing the Deal: The Role of Restrictions in Accentuating the Deal Value,” Journal of Consumer Research 24 (June), 68–79.

This increases Practical Value: For evidence on how restrictions on who can get access to a deal affect perceived value, see Schindler, Robert M. (1998), “Consequences of Perceiving Oneself as Responsible for Obtaining a Discount: Evidence for Smart-Shopper Feelings,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 7, no. 4, 371–92.

whether a discount seems larger: For evidence that perceived value is affected by absolute and relative discounts, see Chen, S.-F. S., K.B. Monroe, and Yung-Chein Lou (1998), “The Effects of Framing Price Promotion Messages on Consumers’ Perceptions and Purchase Intentions,” Journal of Retailing 74, no. 3, 353–72.

You may have heard: See the following for a discussion of the link between vaccines and autism and the consequences of the false information: McIntyre, Peter, and Julie Leask (2008), “Improving Uptake of MMR Vaccine,” British Medical Journal 336, no. 7647, 729–30; Pepys, Mark B. (2007), “Science and Serendipity,” Clinical Medicine 7, no. 6, 562–78; and Mnookin, Seth (2011), The Panic Virus (New York: Simon and Schuster).





6. Stories


battle took place around 1170 BC: Estimates of the timing of the Trojan Horse come from this paper: Baikouzis, Constantino, and Marcelo O. Magnasco (2008), “Is an Eclipse Described in The Odyssey?” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105, no. 26, 8823–28.

Stories . . . help us make sense of the world: Baumeister, Roy F., Liquing Zhang, and Kathleen D. Vohs (2004), “Gossip as Cultural Learning,” Review of General Psychology 8, 111–21.

we’re much more likely to be persuaded: For research related to how stories can make it harder to counterargue, see Kardes, Frank R. (1993), “Consumer Inference: Determinants, Consequences, and Implications for Advertising,” in Advertising Exposure, Memory and Choice, ed. Andrew A. Mitchell (Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum), 163–91.

He lost all that weight: See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jared_Fogle for an overview of the Jared story.

So he created a short film: The backstory came from an interview with Tim Piper on June 18, 2012. The “Evolution” video can be seen at http://jonahberger.com.

2 percent of women describe themselves as beautiful: This fact comes from Etcoff, Nancy, Susie Orbach, Jennifer Scott, and Heidi D’Agostino (2004), The Real Truth About Beauty: A Global Report; retrieved on June 1, 2012, from http://www.scribd.com/doc/16653666/1/%E2%80%9CTHE-REAL-TRUTH-ABOUT-BEAUTY-A-GLOBAL-REPORT%E2%80%9D.

double-digit sales growth: See http://www.marketingvox.com/dove_evolution_goes_viral_with_triple_the_traffic_of_super_bowl_spot-022944/ retrieved on May 15, 2012. Also see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evolution_%28advertisement%29.

Canadian Ron Bensimhon: http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/3579148.stm.

part of a publicity stunt: For a brief discussion of the events, see BBC News (2004), “Jail Sentence for Tutu Prankster,” August 19.

most viewed online advertisement in history: World Records Academy (2011), “Most Viewed Online Ad: ‘Evian Roller Babies’ Sets World Record,” retrieved May 2012 from http://www.worldrecordsacademy.org.

sales dropped almost 25 percent: O’Leary, Noreen (2010), “Does Viral Pay?” retrieved May 21, 2011, from http://www.adweek.com.

In one spot a father is grocery shopping: To watch the Panda clip, go to http://jonahberger.com.

without talking about a blender: For further discussion of valuable virality, see Akpinar, Ezgi, and Jonah Berger (2012), “Valuable Virality,” Wharton working paper.

Psychologists Gordon Allport and Joseph Postman: Allport, Gordon, and Joseph Postman (1947), Psychology of Rumor (New York: H. Holt and Company).





Epilogue


when Thuan Le arrived: For the story of Thuan Le and the Vietnamese nail salons, see Tran, My-Thuan (2008), “A Mix of Luck, Polish,” Los Angeles Times, May 5. Also see http://www.cnn.com/video/?/video/us/2011/07/05/pkg.wynter.vietnamese.nail.salon.cnn.

Cambodian Americans own: Ardey, Julie (2008), “Cambodian Settlers Glaze a Donut Trail,” Daily Yonder, February 18; retrieved from http://www.dailyyonder.com/cambodian-settlers-glaze-donut-trail/2008/02/18/1062.

Koreans own: Bleyer, Jennifer (2008), “Dry Cleaners Feel an Ill Wind from China,” New York Times, April 27.

60 percent of the liquor stores in Boston: Retrieved on March 10, 2012, from http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/murder/peopleevents/p_immigrants.html.

Jews produced: Klinger, Jerry, “The Russians Are Coming, The Russians Are Coming,” America Jewish History 1880–1924, retrieved on March 15, 2012, from http://www.jewishmag.com/85mag/usa8/usa8.htm.

Duncan Watts makes a nice comparison: Watts, Duncan J. (2007), “Challenging the Influentials Hypothesis,” WOMMA Measuring Word of Mouth 3, 207.





Index


A


ABC News, 149

Abercrombie & Fitch, 142

Ad Age, 119

Advertising, 2, 4–7, 16, 19, 32, 125, 187, 208

emotions evoked by, 117, 123

infomercials, 164–65

misleading, as Trojan horse, 190–91

self, through public visibility, 140–44 (see also Branding)

social currency of, 37, 39

triggers and, 62, 66, 70, 79–85

trustworthiness of stories versus, 186

virality of, 22, 196–98

word of mouth versus, 8–10, 43–44

see also Public service announcements; campaigns for specific products

Airline frequent flier programs, 44–45, 47–48

Alcohol abuse, 132–35, 139–40

Allport, Gordon, 199–200

Amazement, 22, 102, 188

Amazon.com, 8

American Airlines, 45

Anderson, Eric, 165

Anheuser-Busch, 86

Antista, Chris, 30

AOL, 140–41

Apple, 125–27, 142, 153

“Think Different” campaign, 109

Arab Spring, 120

Archos, 142

Arend, Rene, 56

Arizona, University of, 132–33, 140

ARK Music Factory, 76

Armstrong, Lance, 144, 145

Arousal, 116–18

physiological, 108–11

Atkins diet, 4

Autism, 99

false information on connection of vaccines and, 176

Awards, 51

Awe, power of, 102–8





B


Baby names, 20

popular, 5–6

Babywearing, 118–19

Balter, Dave, 62–63, 66

Barclay Prime (Philadelphia), 1–2, 170, 210

hundred-dollar cheesesteak at, 2–4, 22, 23, 25, 42, 88–89, 196, 206, 207, 210

Barn raising, 159

Beauty, unrealistic standard of, 191–93

Beckham, David, 3

Behavioral residue, 24, 144–49, 153, 209

Bensimhon, Ron, 193–94, 199

Best Food Ever (television show), 3

Bhatia, Sabeer, 140–41

Binge drinking, 133–35, 139–40

Birds, The (movie), 203

Black, Rebecca, 75–77, 83, 92, 207

BlackBerry, 142

Blair Witch Project, 42–43

Blendtec, 16–18, 42, 43, 171, 208

Will It Blend? campaign, 17–18, 22, 26n, 59, 182, 198, 206, 210

Blogs, 10, 26, 33

emotions and, 95, 97, 119, 123

public visibility of, 149

Bloomingdale’s, 148

BMW, 103, 113

Bono, 224n

Book reviews, 8, 19, 80–81

Boring topics, see Interesting versus boring topics, word-of-mouth about

Boston Market, 84

Boyle, Susan, 103–105, 207

“Boy Who Cried Wolf, The,” 183

Bradlow, Eric, 135

Branding, 210, 221n

stories and, 193, 196, 198

see also specific brands

Brigham Young University, 15, 16

Britain’s Got Talent (television show), 103–104

Buckley, William F., Jr., 158

Budweiser beer, 79–80, 92

Bullying, campaigns against, 68

Burberry, 50–51, 142

Bush, George W., 75

Buzz, see Word of mouth

BzzAgent, 63–69, 78, 84, 221n





C


Cafaro, Anthony, 113–16, 123–24

Cambodian Americans, 205

Cancer:

emotions evoked by, 103, 118

promoting public awareness of, 137–38, 144–45, 153, 207

Carroll, Dave, 111–12

Cars:

purchases of, 20, 36, 135, 217n

repairs to, 186

Chanel, 143

Cheerios, 61–62, 66, 90–91, 206

Cheesesteak, hundred-