rs the content as a “free special report.” To get the free report, the recipient clicks on an embedded URL in the message text.

If the content is a downloadable PDF file, the recipient is brought to a short transaction page. She enters her e-mail address, and is then allowed to download and print the PDF file.

If the content is a series of sequential HTML pages, the recipient is again brought to a short transaction page. She enters her e-mail address, clicks SUBMIT, and is brought to the first page of the microsite where the report is available to read as a posted HTML document.

Within the HTML report, put a number of links to a landing page or transaction page for your paid product. Many readers may click on these links and order your paid product while they are in the middle of reading your free bonus report online.

Either way, the reader must give us her e-mail address to read the free report, which is the key to the online conversion method.

There are many other methods you can use to generate leads for your online conversion campaign. Some marketers have had great success with postcards. Others have used banners or online ads in e-zines.

Finally, you need to convert the leads to paid customers. So far, two things have happened. First, we have captured the prospect’s e-mail address, so we can market to her as often as we like at virtually no cost. And second, we know that the prospect is interested in the topic of our content, because she at least requested a free article or report on it.

Since the content was free, we do not know at this point whether she will pay for products related to this topic. But she is a qualified lead in the sense that she is (a) interested in the topic and (b) responds to online marketing.

The next step is to send her a series of e-mails, known as the online conversion series, with the objective of converting her from a requester of free content to a buyer of our paid product.

Experience so far shows that our online conversion series works best with between three and seven efforts.

Some marketers want every e-mail in the series to attempt to make a sale. That is, they all have a URL the reader can click to reach a page from which the product may be ordered.

Others like the first two e-mails to be simply goodwill, promoting the value of the information and encouraging the reader to actually read the free content—and in some cases even giving her more free content. These are called “free touch” e-mails, because they touch the reader without asking her to purchase.

Subsequent e-mails in the series ask for the order; these are called “conversion e-mails.” In a seven-effort series, the first one or two e-mails might be free touch; the remainder, conversion e-mails.

When the reader clicks on the URL link in your e-mail, she may go to either a landing page or a transaction page. A landing page has a fair amount of descriptive copy about the product you are selling and your offer. It does a strong job of selling the reader on the value of the product. A transaction page has minimal description of the product. It is basically an online order form.

Some marketers always send the e-mail recipient who clicks on the link in the e-mail to the landing page, on the theory that the more sales copy, the more sales made. Other marketers believe that if the conversion e-mail is long and has a lot of sales copy, there is no need to repeat this in a landing page, and so they just send the prospect to a short transaction page.

The best offer for an online conversion effort is a free 30-day trial of the product. If you can set up your site so that the recipient’s credit card is not billed until after the 30-day trial period, that’s the best choice. Then you are truly offering a free trial.

By comparison, if you charge recipients’ credit cards as soon as they submit their orders, it is not really a free 30-day trial; it is a risk-free 30-day trial. The recipients are paying, but if they cancel within 30 days they get a refund.

You can experiment with timing, number of efforts, and mix of efforts (free touch and online conversion) in your online conversion series. A typical series might go like this:

Day 1—e-mail #1, free touch. Thank the prospect for requesting your free content and reinforce its value.

Day 2—e-mail #2, free touch. Encourage the prospect to read the free content and highlight its value. Point out some especially good ideas, tips, or strategies it contains.

Day 4—e-mail #3, online conversion. Tell the prospect he can get of a free 30-day trial of your product. Sell him on the product and its value.

Day 7—e-mail #4. Remind the prospect that he can still solve his problem by getting your product and accepting your free trial offer.

Day 14—e-mail #5. Tell the prospect the free 30-day trial is expiring, resell him on the product you are offering, and urge him to act today. Tell him after that, it’s too late.



Write your online conversion series e-mails the same as you would write other online and offline promotions to sell your products. Use the same copy, content, and organization. Get attention in the lead, generate interest, create desire for your product, and ask for the order.

One key difference: in your lead, always acknowledge that they are hearing from you as a follow-up to the free report or article they asked you to send them. This has two benefits.

First, they may feel slightly more obligated to read your message; after all, you did give them a gift. And second, if they liked the free content, it automatically puts them in a receptive mood for more of the same.

Should you try online conversion? Every marketer who wants to market products and services online could probably benefit from testing an online conversion series.

Just renting an e-list of opt-in names and asking them to subscribe won’t work; people who are online tend not to buy from strangers. But send those same names an offer of a free article or report, and they will take you up on it. After all, what’s to lose?

If you have targeted the right audience, and the free content you provide is of high quality and value, then enough of the readers will want more of the same and be willing to accept a free 30-day trial of products related to the same topic.

And if your product is of high quality and value, a large percentage of the readers will not send it back and request a refund. You will have successfully converted free content requesters to paid buyers—your goal in online conversion.





WRITING A MARKETING E-ZINE


For many marketers, the fastest way to build a house list of opt-in e-mail names and addresses—an important asset for online marketing—is with the offer of a free subscription to an online newsletter or “e-zine.”



The free e-zine is the online equivalent of a company newsletter, except it is distributed electronically instead of printed and mailed. The cost and time savings are tremendous—an e-zine can be distributed at virtually no cost, almost instantaneously, to thousands of prospects and customers at the click of a mouse.

When you build a large subscription list for your e-zine, you can then send promotions to potential customers via the Internet whenever you want, generating thousands of extra dollars in incremental sales you might not otherwise have made. And you save thousands of dollars on printing and postage.

Many online marketing tools are used to drive potential customers to a Web page where they can sign up for a free subscription to your e-zine in exchange for giving you their e-mail address. You can also ask for their name, which allows you to personalize future e-mails you send to them.

These traffic-building methods include such things as banner ads, online ads in e-zines reaching similar audiences, e-mail marketing, pay-per-click advertising, and search engine optimization of the e-zine sign-up Web site. The acquisition cost per subscriber can range from $1 to $5 a name, depending on the method used and the market targeted.

Generally, the larger and more targeted your subscriber list, the more profitable your online marketing will be. After all, a click-through rate (CTR) of 1 percent to one thousand e-zine subscribers will bring just ten visitors to your landing page; but if you have a million online subscribers, a 1 percent CTR will generate ten thousand visits.

But for your e-zine to work as an online marketing tool, subscribers must not only sign up; they must also open and read your e-newsletters. If they don’t open the current issue, they can’t respond to any of the ads or offers you make in it. And if they don’t read it on an ongoing basis, they will eventually unsubscribe, and you will lose them as an online prospect.

In my experience, the best e-zines—those with the highest open, read, and click-through rates—are those that present useful how-to tips in short, bite-size chunks, the more practical and actionable, the better.

Your e-zine is not the place to pontificate on business philosophy or explain complex technology; you can send your subscribers to Web pages and downloadable white papers or special reports that cover those topics. E-zine readers love practical articles that tell them how to do something useful—and do so in just a few concise paragraphs.

News also can serve as effective e-zine content but, by itself, is not as potent as advice. The best way to use news is to link a tip or other advice to it. For instance, if you are a financial publisher talking about crude oil, tell the reader which oil stocks he should own to profit from volatility in oil prices.

You don’t need a news angle to make advice an effective content strategy for your free e-zine. However, if you can relate your tips to current events or news, do so; experience shows that it can potentially double your readership and response.

That being said, you never know which article is going to strike your e-zine reader’s fancy. And it’s often not the article you’d think. For instance, a manager for a company that sells information on safety to HR managers publishes a regular e-zine on safety and other HR issues. He reports that his best-read article of all time was “10 Ways to Reduce Eye Strain at Your PC.”

The eye-strain article generated much more response than more specialized articles targeted to his HR audience. Go figure.

Here’s what I’ve found makes the ideal e-zine article (many of these ideas are borrowed from my colleague Ilise Benun, of www.artofselfpromotion.com):

1. Think of yourself as a conduit. Your job is to pass useful information along to those who can use it.

2. Pay close attention to questions, problems, and ideas that come up when you’re doing your work or interacting with customers.

3. Distill the lesson (or lessons) into a tip that you can share with your network, via e-mail or snail mail or even in simple conversation.

4. State the problem or situation as an introduction to your tip. Distill it down to its essence.

5. Give the solution. Tips are action-oriented. So make sure you give a couple of action steps to take. Readers especially love something they can use right away, like the ten tips on how to reduce eye strain while working at a PC.

6. Describe the result or benefit of using these tips to provide some incentive to take the action. If there are tools readers can use to measure the results of your tip once they put it into practice, give them a link to Web sites offering these tools.

7. Include tips the reader can use without doing any work, phrases they can use verbatim, boilerplate clauses, checklists, forms, and so on.

8. List Web sites and other resources where readers can go for more info.

9. Put your best tip first, in case people don’t read the whole thing—because sometimes even really short tips are too much.

Be aware that most e-zines have a dual audience consisting of: (1) prospects who get the free e-zine but are not your customers, and (2) subscribers who have bought products from you and get your free e-zine because they are on your customer list.

For reasons of economy of scale and simplicity of management, most publishers use one e-zine to serve both audiences. But you have to keep the different needs and perspectives of both groups in mind for your e-zine to be effective.

The first group of e-zine subscribers consists of people who have signed up for your free online newsletter. They have not yet bought products from you, and in fact may not even be aware of your products or even who you are.

Your goal with these subscribers is to (a) delight them with the free e-zine they are receiving; and (b) upgrade them to the next step—purchase of one of your products or services.

To accomplish these goals:

•  Pack the e-zine with solid content. Nothing beats useful, practical, how-to tips.

•  Put a 50- to 100-word ad in each issue of your e-zine offering a free 30-day trial for one of your products, with a link to a landing page where the reader can accept such an offer.

•  Send at least one solo e-mail to subscribers between e-zine issues giving them a compelling reason to accept your 30-day free trial offer; this could be the offer of premium, such as a free gift or free content (e.g., a special report). If you offer free content, let them get the report as a downloadable PDF after they order your product on the landing page.

The second group of e-zine subscribers are customers: people who have already purchased one or more of your products. Your e-zine can do any or all of the following for your customers:

Give them news updates, recommendations, and fresh ideas for using your products

Highlight product upgrades, new accessories, or other product-related items of interest

Bring them special discount offers on your other products and services



Can you stray from my formula of how-to advice and tips? Of course. My e-zine, The Direct Response Letter (available at www.bly.com), uses many different types of articles including book reviews, quotations, news items, and new product announcements.

But take a tip from me. When you’re putting together your next e-zine issue, remember that nothing gains the reader’s interest and attention like solid how-to tips.





14



WRITING ONLINE ADS



Many small and medium-size businesses use Internet advertising as a direct response sales tool, meaning the Web surfer sees their ad, clicks on it, and is sent to the Web site or landing page, and buys their product.

The problem with this sales model when it comes to banner advertising is that it relies on interruption. The person who sees their banner presumably is on a Web page they want to be on, and to click the banner interrupts them from what they were doing.

Therefore, banner advertising, though still viable as a direct response tool, may be better suited for image advertising or branding. Because of its broad reach and high frequency, a banner can be very effective for increasing brand awareness. Unfortunately, it is not easy to measure that effect. Branding is a long-term tactic that slowly builds results over time.

Like with a television commercial, viewers may not take immediate action when they see your banner, but they will remember your name when they are ready to buy. But unlike with a television commercial, users still have the ability to take immediate action.

Because banner advertising has become less expensive, and can both build awareness of your product and get an immediate response, it may well be a very cost effective form of advertising as long as you understand that building awareness is part of its purpose.





BANNER SIZE


When you talk about banner ad size, you can be referring to one of two different things: file weight or ad dimensions. File weight is measured in bytes. With broadband Internet, file weight is not nearly as important as it once was. It still is best, however, to keep your banner file size below 25 KB.

An ad’s dimensions can be any size that the host page will accept. The Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) has defined twenty standard sizes (see below). The IAB is a nonprofit trade association for the interactive advertising industry; it has created these guidelines to reduce the number of ad sizes and simplify the ad creation process.

These dimensions are measured in pixels, which are basic units from which a video or computer picture is made.





RECTANGLES AND POP-UPS


Medium Rectangle



300 x 250



Square Pop-Up



250 x 250



Vertical Rectangle



240 x 400



Large Rectangle



336 x 280



Rectangle



180 x 150



3:1 Rectangle



300 x 100



Pop-Under



720 x 300





BANNERS AND BUTTONS


Full Banner



468 x 60



Half Banner



234 x 60



Micro Bar



88 x 31



Button 1



120 x 90



Button 2



120 x 60



Vertical Banner



120 x 240



Square Banner



125 x 125



Leaderboard



728 x 90





SKYSCRAPERS (VERTICAL BANNERS)


Wide Skyscraper



160 x 600



Skyscraper



120 x 600



Half Page Ad



300 x 600



For the longest time, the 468 x 200 banner was the most common, but with competition for quality advertisers, publishers have begun to give more space for advertising.

Generally speaking, the larger the ad, the more memorable it will be and the more click-throughs it will get, but that doesn’t mean that smaller ads won’t work; page position, content and relevancy, and design will also play an important role. Advertising.com examined the click-through and conversion rates on banners. It found that the medium rectangle (300 x 250) had the highest click-through rates, and the wide skyscraper (160 x 600) had the second-highest.





PAGE POSITION


Page position plays nearly as great a role in the effectiveness of the ad as its size. For image advertising, a top-of-the-page position is best because it is seen and remembered, but not necessarily clicked upon, whereas an ad further into the page and along the side may be more targeted and therefore more likely to get clicked.

Ads appearing near the scroll bar can generate a high click-through rate. The theory is that users click on the ad because their pointer is already poised near it.





BANNER DESIGN AND CONTENT


Banners have come a long way in recent years. With higher bandwidth and better technologies, animations and graphics are much better. Rather than simply link to a new page, banners and ads can have some mouse-over interactivity. Some things work better than others. Following are generalizations about what works best.

Text: The amount of text on your banner must be kept to a minimum, so a small amount of text must have a large impact. Techniques you can use include offering a benefit for clicking on your ad, like “Get More Traffic.” Ask a question, the answer to which is on your site. Create a sense of urgency by using phrases like “For a Limited Time.” Use the word “Free.” Having a good call to action by using phrases such as “Click Here” or “Learn More” can increase the number of clicks.

Your ad should also be relevant. The closer your ad matches the content of the page you are on, the more effective it will be. Keep the message short. People will not take time to read a lot of text. Simple banners have a higher click-through ratio.

Color and Graphics: Ideally, your ad would complement the page on which it appears, but because a single ad usually is displayed on many different Web sites, it is often impractical to design an ad for each site or page on which the ad appears. Studies have shown that bright colors like blue, yellow, and green get the highest click-through rate. Graphics should be eye-catching, but kept to a minimum. For purposes of branding or recognition advertising, you can use your company logo.

Animation and Interactivity: Animation and interactivity play three important roles in banner and display advertising. First, an ad with motion will gain attention so your ad is less likely to be ignored. Second, when you engage the viewer with interactivity, such as mouse-over effects or drop-down menus, you increase click-throughs. And third, these ads are more memorable, so even if they don’t generate a click they do more for image building.





SEARCH ENGINE PAY-PER-CLICK (PPC) ADS


The first step in starting a pay-per-click campaign is to decide how much you are willing to spend and for what purpose. Do you want to capture a lead for future follow-up or do you need your traffic to generate instant sales?

Figure out how much each click is worth to determine the maximum amount you are willing to pay—that will be your maximum cost per click (CPC). If you’re selling a single low-cost item, your CPC will need to be pretty low.

On the other hand, when selling an item with a higher profit margin, you can afford a higher CPC. Likewise, if by capturing a lead you can sell to the same person over and over again, though you may not recoup your cost on the first sale, having the ability to sell to that customer over and over again will allow you to afford a higher CPC.

Here is a simple example. If it takes twenty clicks to get one sale, and each click costs you $1, each order costs you $20. Is the profit on your product over that amount? If not, you need to make sure your clicks cost less or that you have a higher conversion rate or price point.

Some people use PPC not to sell products but to build their list. The amount you can spend per click is based on the average value of names on your list. If you have $200,000 a year in online sales and twenty thousand names on your list, your average name is worth ten bucks a year.

To find the best keywords for your product, first brainstorm them yourself. No one knows your product better than you. Think about what a person looking for your product might type into the search engine.

Be specific. Don’t just come up with generic terms. Get as specific as you can. If you are a jeweler, it’s better to advertise for “gold loop earrings” than to use the more generic keyword “jewelry.”

Another set of keywords that may gain high conversions are those that establish your product or service as an alternative to something else. For example, you may use the keyword “diamond” to advertise for cubic zirconium. Your ad would then give reasons why your product is a better deal than the word they searched on to begin with.

Gain holiday and special occasion traffic. Use holidays or special occasions as your keywords, especially when you have a retail item that lends itself to gift giving. “Holidays,” “birthdays,” ‘‘weddings,” and “graduations”—all are great search terms. You may come up with phrases like “Mother’s Day gift,” “engagement ring,” or “anniversary present.”

After coming up with your obvious keywords, start thinking of less obvious searches or related searches. You may think of “wedding vows” because someone interested in vows may also need a wedding ring or bridesmaid’s gifts. Be creative in coming up with your words. When using them, make sure you incorporate them in your title and body copy, such as “The Perfect Mother’s Day Gift.”

If you can figure out a way to make them relevant, current events, popular celebrities, and hot topics all make good search terms. But make sure you can relate these terms to your landing page and offer; if you don’t, you’ll just get a lot of traffic but very few conversions.

After you have selected your keywords, use Google’s keyword planner tool to see what kind of volume they get in number of searches and how crowded the competition is. Your best case is to see lots of searches and few bidders.

But having competition isn’t all bad. When you have competition, you know it is a viable product that people are searching on and buying; otherwise no one would be advertising. This tool will also give you suggestions for similar words. Pull out the ones that you think are best.

You’ll find an abundance of other keyword tools that can help you find the most cost-effective and productive keywords. Some are free; some cost a small fee.

Now that you have identified your core keywords, you are going to write several ads for each group of keywords that you have made. Here’s how to structure your ad:

Headline: The first line is your headline. Always use keywords in your headline.

Your headline can be two lines of up to 30 characters long. That is not a lot, especially when so much of it is taken up with a keyword or two. Make your headline attention grabbing.

Ask a Question: “Find Your Engagement Ring Yet?”

State Superiority: “World’s Finest Diamond Engagement Rings”

Appeal to Basic Emotions (love, greed, fear): “A Diamond That’ll Make Her Love You More”



Body: The body is a descriptive line with a maximum of 80 characters.

Display URL with Hyperlink: Your domain is the last line of the ad and is automatically extracted by Google from your final URL to ensure accuracy. The worst thing you can do is drive tons of traffic to your site at a high cost-per-click without converting that traffic into a sale or lead. Consider adding a qualifying word or phrase to your ad. For example, suppose you’re selling a fly-fishing guide for $19.99. By placing the price of the guide in your ad, you’ll discourage “tire kickers”—anyone who is looking for free information and is not willing to pay your price.

If at all possible, use a Web address that includes your keywords, even if you have to create it. The best method is to buy a dedicated domain name specifically for each landing page.





ADVERTISING IN E-NEWSLETTERS


All types of e-zine ads can be valuable to you. This section will explain the three different types of e-zine ads and how they can work for you.

Solo Ad: A solo ad is when an e-zine sends your content to its mailing list all by itself. In other words, the e-mail is solely your content and not part of the regular newsletter.

Sponsorship Ad: E-zines can feature any number of sponsorship ads and often break down their pricing by the position the ad is given within the body of the newsletter. A Top Sponsor ad is positioned at the beginning of the e-mail and is usually the most expensive ad.

Whenever an ad is placed anywhere after the first article, it is referred to as a Middle Sponsor. A newsletter can have any number of Middle Sponsor ads. The most effective Middle Sponsor ads are those that appear next to articles on topics related to the product being advertised, e.g., a Middle Sponsor ad selling grass seed positioned next to an article on lawn care.

A Bottom Sponsor ad is the last ad in the e-zine. It appears after all the regular content but before the classified ads. These ads are generally the least expensive sponsorship ads.

Text ad: A text ad is usually between three and five lines long and 60 to 65 characters per line. In the e-zines with the largest readership, these ads are fairly cheap, anywhere from $5 to $25 per issue.

Some newsletters allow you to place FREE ads with them in exchange for being placed on their e-mailing list. This is one way they grow their lists. But because it doesn’t cost you anything (except your time and a cluttered e-mail box), any response you get is good.

Don’t forget that because e-zines are often archived, you will have a permanent link pointing to your Web site. Even if customers aren’t accessing your site, the search engine spiders are.

The design of your ad will depend greatly on the newsletter it will be placed in and what type of ad you are running. Check the newsletter’s specifications. Many are strictly text with no graphics so they are low in bandwidth and can easily pass spam filters. You may also ask the e-zine publisher what works best. After all, they know their audience better than anyone.

When running a solo ad, your content should be similar to the publisher’s regular newsletter. Make your ad seem like the kind of information normally seen in the e-zine. In other words, make it appear to be newsworthy and avoid hype. Solo ads allow you the opportunity to educate your consumer and expand upon the benefits of your product.

Here a killer headline is imperative to attract attention. The headline’s job is to get the reader’s attention and then draw him into the ad copy. It will do that if it contains the words your prospect has on his mind, so be sure to include one of your keywords if possible. The following is an example of a solo online ad (it ran before 9/11 and the war in Iraq):





* * *



BOMBS FALL IN BAGHDAD AND YOU MAKE MONEY!

Little-known defense contractor poised to return 100 percent profit even if Bush never declares war on Iraq, and 500 percent profits if he does. FREE research report gives details on this pure defense play and 4 other “stealth stocks” that have managed to fly under Wall Street’s radar. Best part: Our “stealth stocks” system keeps you safely in cash when market sentiment turns negative. Safest way to make money in today’s market. We’ve already earned gains of 58, 108, even 241% … generated consistent positive gains—and handily beaten the S&P using this method. FIND OUT MORE.



* * *





For sponsorship and classified ads, you don’t have the luxury of space and you don’t have the reader’s undivided attention. You are limited to a half dozen lines or less with fewer than 70 characters per line. Because of this your ad must carry a greater impact.

When push comes to shove, when creating an effective e-zine advertisement, the same rules for all advertising apply: have a strong headline, state a need, show how your product can fulfill that need, and provide a strong call to action.





FACEBOOK ADS


Currently Facebook has well over 2 billion users; LinkedIn, the network for professionals, boasts a user base of 630 million. Again, you want to put your attention where your audience is congregating, so one of the other social sites—Reddit, Tumblr, Instagram, Pinterest, and Twitter—may have advertising potential for your business.

Facebook’s Advertising Guide (https://www.facebook.com/business/ads-guide) describes the specifications for three ad formats: video, image, and collection formats. As image ads are a reasonable starting point in Facebook advertising, this section focuses on this format. Due to the popularity of videos online, video ad specifications will follow.

Basically pay-per-click advertising, the average cost of a click, is about $1.25. If you’re going this route, you’ll quickly find that there are many design and content options. Here are the basic requirements for single image ads: run in the right-hand column (as opposed to single-image ads running in the Facebook feed). The specifications below date from March 2019.

Image Specifications

Recommended image dimensions are 1200 x 628 pixels.

Minimum width and height of 600 pixels.

Recommended aspect ratio is between 9:16 and 16:9, but crops to 1.91:1 with link.

Recommended image formats are JPG and PNG.

Images with 20% text or more could increase chances of failed delivery.

Size: 1,200 x 628 pixels.

Ratio: 1.91:1 (the proportional relationship between its width and its height; it is commonly expressed as two numbers separated by a colon, as in 16:9).

Facebook suggests you use minimal or no text on the image.



Copy Limitations:

Text: 125 characters.

Headline: 25 characters.

Link description: 30 characters.





WRITING FACEBOOK IMAGE ADS


What makes an effective Facebook image ad? Two things: bright, eye-catching images and compelling, persuasive content. But, according to the ad experts at Facebook, it’s the image that does the “heavy work.” Research found images are so important that they’re responsible for some 75 to 90 percent of an ad’s performance. It’s smart, they say, to test ten to fifteen images (keeping the ad copy the same across all variations).

Facebook actually recommends de-prioritizing copy; copywriters know better. Always give the words the attention they deserve. Here’s an ad with an offer directed at Facebook marketers. Picture this: a distressed, frustrated writer sitting in front of a blank computer screen. Top-level ad content reads:

Let me show you how easy it is to write a Facebook ad. You see the tricks, tips, and gotcha you need to know. Great for the newer marketer!

Get the checklist for writing Facebook ads

This downloadable checklist takes away all the frustrating mystery of “figuring out” how to write a great Facebook ad.



In writing Facebook ads, success is more about capturing attention and inspiring viewers not only to respond to the call to action, but also to “like” and share what they’ve seen. Since the image is what draws their eyes, it’s suggested you put key messages within the image. However, Facebook won’t allow you to use an image where copy takes up more than 20 percent of it. “Text” includes copy you’ve overlaid on an image as well as text-based logos, watermarks, and even text in your video’s thumbnail images.

Facebook ads with photos, first and foremost, are usually small. And given that they have an image, copy must be kept to a minimum.

WordStream has a simplified formula for writing Facebook ads that I think is right on the money. The ad has to tell the reader these three basic things:

What you’re offering

How it benefits them

What to do next



And AdEspresso offers these eight sensible guidelines specifically for Facebook ad headlines:

Use numbers. There’s plenty of copywriting research that all points to one conclusion: headlines that start with numbers are often winners.

Create a sense of urgency.

Be clear and precise.

Keep your headlines short.

Emphasize the benefits.

Include a call to action.

Ask a question.

Use powerful words.



Specifics on these points are covered earlier in the book; see chapters 1, 2, 3, and 4.





FACEBOOK VIDEO ADS


In November 2018, Hootsuite noted that 71 percent of people had increased their online video viewing during that year. And 60 percent expect to watch more social video in the coming year. Another point of interest: Facebook users look at ads five times longer when they’re consuming video. People gaze five times longer at video than at static posts on Facebook.

The Facebook ad specs of single videos ads are:

Format—.MOV or .MP4.

Aspect Ratio—16:9.

Resolution—720p at minimum.

File Size—2.3 GB maximum.

Length—120 minutes (Facebook), sixty seconds (Instagram)

Thumbnail Image—1,200 x 675 pixels, 16.9 ratio.

Caption—2,200 characters maximum.



Facebook offers a few simple suggestions for making engaging videos, including:

Create Facebook Video Ads with mobile in mind.

Create for mobile by using a vertical or square video format.

Capture viewer attention. Mobile users move quickly, so it’s imperative that the video engages them immediately.

Include your brand or product early.

Design for silent viewing. Many people silence their phones as a point of courtesy when in public.



Other suggestions from marketers skilled in creating successful Facebook video ad campaigns include:

Adding text to your videos

Using imagery that makes sense without sound

Upload subtitles with your videos

The most effective length for Facebook ad titles is four words, with fifteen-word link descriptions. Here’s an example: Create Instant e-Books

(thumbnail)





Watch Me Create an e-Book in 2 Minutes

Create Stunning e-Books, Reports, Lead Magnets

and Whitepapers from Your Blog, Word, Google …





FACEBOOK VIDEO VS. YOUTUBE: WHICH IS BETTER?


According to a recent survey, 47 percent of consumers state that they now get most of their video content on Facebook, versus 41 percent who say they usually watch YouTube. And 71 percent of those who watch marketing videos on Facebook state that the ads they view are relevant. Even more important to brands is that between 60 and 70 percent of those who view a company’s Facebook video then proceed to visit that company’s Web site.





ADDITIONAL FACEBOOK ADVERTISING FORMATS


There are other Facebook ad formats, including slideshow carousel and canvas ad formats. The carousel format allows you to use a combination of all other ad types, running up to ten images, slideshows, or videos in one single campaign. Each element can even be linked out to different landing pages.

The slideshow format is as it sounds: it creates a looping video ad out of up to ten different images. The Facebook ads let you create a full-screen interactive experience for the viewer. As there are separate specs for each individual element you’ll choose, you’ll need to consult the Facebook Advertising Center (https://www.facebook.com/business) for detailed specifications.





BOOSTED POSTS AND PROMOTED POSTS


A boosted post is the most basic advertising you can do on Facebook. It is created by allocating advertising budget to a post already on the businesses’ page. By clicking the button in the top right corner of the post, you have the option to choose pushing the post to either “People who like your page and their friends” or “People you choose through targeting.” You’ll also be able to set your budget.

Promoted Posts is an advertising option from Facebook that enables you to make sure the posts you want to market get seen in the News Feeds of more people. The advertising value of boosting your posts has been debated. Some argue it’s smarter to go with Promoted Posts instead. What that does is push your post into the news feed. The benefit of this strategy is that you have more targeting, pricing, and bidding options.





HOW MUCH DOES FACEBOOK ADVERTISING COST?


Your ad cost depends on many factors: time of year, time of day, audience gender, and ad position. Truthfully, Facebook ads cost anywhere from less than a dollar to over $5, depending on such factors as ad quality and competition. Fortunately, you can get started for as little as $10 to $20.





LINKEDIN ADVERTISING


According to the LinkedIn advertising team, this site for global professional networking currently boasts a membership of well over six hundred million. In their opinion, LinkedIn is the #1 social platform for business-to-business lead generation and networking for jobs (although indeed.com is the #1 job acquisition site).

That said, let’s explore the advertising options available via LinkedIn: the common text-based ad, which we’ll explore later; then there are dynamic and display ads, Sponsored InMail ads, and Sponsored Content. Knowing what a text-based ad is, let’s define those unfamiliar ad formats.

Dynamic ads: Right-column (also called “right rail”) personalized ads tailored to each member based on their profile data, such as company name or job title. There are currently three types of dynamic ad formats to choose from: spotlight, follower, and job posting ads (irrelevant to this discussion).



1. Spotlight Ads: Here’s your chance to share thought leadership, best practices, insights, and valuable content with your target audience. When members click on your ad, they’re directed to your Web site or landing page, where you can record actions like leads, sign-ups, and visits. You can use spotlight ads to drive conversions and to build brand awareness.

2. Follower Ads: This format allows advertisers to promote their LinkedIn page and drive members to follow their LinkedIn page with a single click. This format is recommended for advertisers whose objectives are to generate brand awareness, increase engagement with the LinkedIn page, or convert LinkedIn members into engaged followers. These ads feature the member’s profile photo next to your company’s logo. They also feature the member’s first name and your company name in the ad copy.

Display Advertising: Sometimes called banner advertising, a display ad includes an image and text content.

Sponsored InMail ads: InMail messages are sent directly to another LinkedIn member you’re not connected to. If you have a Basic (free) account, you must upgrade to a Premium account to use InMail. You receive a specific number of InMail credits based on your subscription type. Sponsored InMail allows you to drive more leads and engage your target audience by delivering personalized, private messages right to their LinkedIn inboxes. Sponsored InMail messages consist of a custom greeting, call-to-action button, body text, custom banner image, and ability to add a link to the message body.

Sponsored Content: There are two types of sponsored content, simple sponsored and direct sponsored content. Simple Sponsored Content is a LinkedIn page update created by Page admins, which advertisers can choose to sponsor to gain greater distribution.

Direct Sponsored Content is Sponsored Content that does not appear on the LinkedIn page or Showcase Page. It allows advertisers to create content to sponsor on behalf of the company without cluttering the LinkedIn page or Showcase Page and without first posting a LinkedIn page update.





Note: Showcase Pages are second-level pages accessible off of a company page. They allow a company to promote specific products or market to a specific buyer persona. LinkedIn users can follow singular Showcase Pages without following the business or its other Showcase Pages.

Because LinkedIn offers many advertising options, it’s suggested you consult the LinkedIn Marketing Solutions specifications page (https://www.linkedin.com/help/lms/topics/8154/8155/ad-specs-guidelines). When it comes to costs, depending on the format you choose, you’ll pay on the pay-per-click (PPC) or cost-per-impressions (CPM) or cost-per-send (CPS) for InMail advertising.





WRITING A LINKEDIN TEXT AD


It’s much the same as with Facebook text-based ads. Your creativity will be bounded by character and ad size limitations. Currently the specifications are as follows:

Available in a variety of sizes: 300 x 250 pixels, 17 x 700 pixels, 160 x 600 pixels, 72 x 90 pixels, and 496 x 80 pixels.

Image size (if you use one): 50 x 50 pixels.

Headline: 25 character limit (including spaces).

Description: 75 character limit (including spaces).



Here’s an example of a text-based ad seen on LinkedIn. It’s small, features an image of a satisfied professional woman, and reads:





VIP OF LEARNING?


Train your team to Speak to Senior-Level Decision Makers.





Free Webinar


The presentation of this next text ad is slightly different, in that it clearly presents the Web address in question (as opposed to having it embedded in the code of the advertisement) and is branded.





FILL YOUR FUNNEL


Generate leads from LinkedIn with HubSpot’s free guide.

From Hubspot go to URL: http://www.namethislandingpage.com.





15



WRITING FOR SOCIAL MEDIA





WHAT YOU SHOULD KNOW ABOUT SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS


One aspect of the many social media platforms available that you should be aware of is that you write and post differently for each one. What you post on Facebook will be different from what you post on Twitter or LinkedIn, even if the posts are about the same topic. The main rules of good content writing for any platform are:

Concise writing—avoid extra words; social media posts should be short and direct, starting with an interesting title or lead.

Write to engage your readers and give lots of interesting information within two to three sentences or paragraphs, depending on your platform.

Encourage readers to leave comments on your post by asking “Do you agree?” or “What do you think?”





CREATE BUSINESS ACCOUNTS


Create a business page account rather than using a personal page account to market your products or services. This is a more professional way to brand your company and keep the brand uppermost in readers’ minds when they view your content. Using a personal page account to support your business brand makes you look unprofessional and amateurish, unless your name is the brand.

One woman recently sponsored one of her business posts with 500 words of content, which took up the whole length of the page, once opened. There were five or six sentences per paragraph, making it difficult to read through quickly.

Save long content for blogs. Most social media readers prefer to read a few small paragraphs and move on after “liking” the post.

Have the following information available for readers on your business page, such as:

The business name and logo.

A way to contact you, such as an e-mail address, or phone number if you want calls.

Information about your business and what the business offers to clients.





USING A FUNNEL APPROACH


Use a different title for each piece of content you post, based on the platform you use. Each title must still relate to your same subject matter that you are sending all readers to, if that is your post’s intent. If you write a blog located on your business Web site, you can funnel readers from each of your social media platform posts, with a link to that blog placed at the end of the post. Here are examples of changing content and titles across platforms, leading to the same blog.

Facebook content post title: “Put Together Winning Google Ads Better and Faster!”



If you want to know more about how to create Google Ads, then check out our latest blog where we show you, step by step, how to create your ad. You will also learn about how to select the right keywords to use with your ad. Check it out!

https://bestSEOpractices.com/blog/google-ads-creation



Twitter content post title: “Quickly Design Your Google Ads!”



Check out our latest process for quickly creating Google Ads so you will get found! Click below on the link to find out more!

https://bestSEOpractices.com/blog/google-ads-creation



LinkedIn content post title: “Create Google Ads in Five Minutes and Succeed!”



Learn about our latest processes for designing Google Ads in record time. We also show you the best way to select your keywords to get you noticed in search results.

https://bestSEOpractices.com/blog/google-ads-creation



You can find out more about avoiding duplicate content at Google’s support page here: https://support.google.com/webmasters/answer/66359?hl=en.

Your strategy for each of your social media accounts becomes part of your overall multichannel marketing strategy of getting your product or services noticed everywhere on the Internet. To do that, you must write short, interesting, informative posts, like the samples shown above that grab the readers’ attention so that they continue down the funnel to your blog or landing page. They may also sign up to receive your newsletters or e-mails, once they have read your blog.

A diagram of how your basic funnel works for using social media and blogging to drive traffic to your opt-in e-list sign-up page is shown in fig.15.1.

Fig. 15.1: Social media funnel.





TIPS FOR WRITING SOCIAL MEDIA POSTS


Posts are where you can express your opinion, share content, and have conversations. You pretty much have free reign to say or show whatever you want, with a few possible exceptions—but not many. Among the social media networks that allow comments are YouTube, LinkedIn, Twitter, Facebook, and of course blogs. Your posts are most likely to be seen by your Facebook friends, though they are viewable by many other FB users as well. Your tweets will be seen by your Twitter followers, your LinkedIn posts and articles by your LinkedIn connections.

Here are some guidelines for writing on social media:

Have an objective. Do you want to express an opinion or your feelings? Speak out on major issues of the day? Share advice, information, tips, or instruction? Make an offer such as a free e-book download? Start or participate in interesting conversation threads? Promote your business and your brand? Or just have fun? Know why you are doing Facebook posts. If you can’t think of a reason, why bother?

When you write content, be personable, and write as if you were speaking to each of your readers individually.

Be conservative when it comes to cutesy words and especially profanity. Some people can get away with that, but you may find it a difficult persona to carry off if you are new to the marketplace. People will want to know you better, but if they are regularly bombarded with the C word or F word, more than a few readers may be offended and complain on social media about your business postings. For the vast majority of FB users, the C and F words do not serve them well.

Participate in threads and respond when appropriate to comments left on your posts. Social media is an interactive two-way medium. So it can generate involvement and engagement as well as build relationships.

If posting on Facebook for business, avoid controversial topics such as anything concerned with politics, religion, race, or gender issues. Facebook may suspend your account if you are sharing negative news about world events or people and making derogatory, coarse comments that are slanted.

In your posts, end the post with a phrase that openly encourages and asks for feedback and comments. Some of the ones that work well include:



“What say you?”

“What do you think?”

“Do you agree or disagree?”

“How does this sound to you—good, fair, bad, or terrible?”





KEEP YOUR READERS ENGAGED THROUGH REGULAR POSTING SCHEDULES


You can design a schedule for posting your content on a regular basis, such as every Tuesday and Friday. You can even create a themed post that your readers can expect to see on those days. Keep your posts interesting and focused on a topic that your readers look forward to reading.

For example, you can create original content posts about search engine optimization (SEO) tactics to use, which you post on Mondays and Thursday. On Wednesday and Friday, you post content about multichannel marketing tactics. At the end of each post, ask readers what they think. Each post can have a link leading to your business blog of the day, relating to those posts.





* * *



FIVE RULES FOR FACEBOOK CONVERSATIONS

Remember “netiquette,” the rules for acceptable online communication? We need a handbook, “Netiquette for Facebook,” to show people how to behave civilly during a FB discussion, thread, or argument.

Rule #1: Don’t directly say or even imply that the other person is stupid because you disagree with what he says.

Rule #2: When someone presents a link to a resource with data supporting their point, don’t dismiss it simply by saying it is false, fake, or wrong. Why not? Because you don’t know that for a fact. It’s just your opinion. So say it’s your opinion and back up your assertion with evidence supporting YOUR viewpoint. But just saying an article, Web site, study, or other proof from a credible source is B.S. without facts or logic to back you up is, well, a lot of B.S. on your part.

Rule #3: You cannot use logic and rational discourse to remove a thought from someone’s mind that was not put there with logic in the first place. So don’t even try to engage them. It is a fruitless endeavor and an enormous waste of your time and energy.

Rule #4: Don’t state opinions as if they were indisputable facts. Opinion: filet mignon is better than chopped liver. Fact: Bob Bly likes chopped liver better than filet mignon.

Rule #5: As the writer Harlan Ellison states, you are actually not entitled to an opinion about everything and anything. You are entitled only to your INFORMED opinion. The average person is well-informed in only a handful of subject matter areas. But you see them on FB arguing and giving their opinions about everything and anything. Don’t do that. The only way to know what you are talking about, said author Robert B. Parker, is to talk about only things that you know.



* * *





FACEBOOK


Facebook, in the first quarter of 2019, had 2.38 billion active users worldwide, according to Statista.com. This statistic covers all users who have logged in at least once in the last thirty days.

SproutSocial.com reports that, on a global level, India has the highest number of Facebook users at 300 million, and is in first place over the United States, which has 210 million. You can go to either of these Web sites to get more information on demographics when deciding where your best target market group can be found, by platform usage and other associated criteria, such as age and gender.





• Business page vs. personal page


You may already have a personal page account with Facebook, where you have connected with family members and friends. Separate your personal life from your business life to be more professional when it comes to marketing your business.

Create a business page that is attached to your personal account.

The home page is where you create posts and type in your business name and set your logo. You will also see where you can promote your page and create event listings.





• Add professional images and information


Upload all of your high-quality images to your business page account—such as your brand logo, images for company history sections on what the company offers to its customers, your administrator profile picture—and set up messaging and contact information, too. You are guided by Facebook on each part. After filling out the information, you can start posting.





• Develop a posting schedule


Plan to add posts at least twice a week to begin adding readers and followers. Facebook is good at “nudging” you to add a post, so your business stays in the public eye. If you have the budget, use Facebook Ads to help bring in relevant readers interested in what you offer. You select the demographics of the target readers you want, and Facebook does all the rest. This can build your follower rates faster than if you were to not advertise at all.

SproutSocial.com suggests the number of characters to use in a post, including spaces between words and punctuation marks. If you do not want to spend time counting character spaces, insert your copy into the free social media character counter located on its page here: sproutsocial.com/insights/social-media-character-counter/.





• Structure of a Facebook post


Start with a good attention-grabbing headline consisting of roughly five words.

Write, at most, two or three paragraphs, with one or two short sentences in each, about 80 characters in total for your whole post.

Keep your content brief, interesting, and always related to the headline.

Add a topic-related image, photograph, or video.

Add a link to your topic-related blog, or to an e-mail or newsletter sign-up page (optional).



Facebook posts I make are intended to be thought-provoking and also to elicit comments on the subject matter, both positive and negative. If you are a small business, a one-person sole proprietor, you can create interesting posts that grab readers’ attention. As a business on a Facebook business page, create a post that does not give an opinion, but encourages readers to respond with their own viewpoints. See the samples below.





This one got a lot of emotional response.





LINKEDIN


The focus of LinkedIn is connecting with business professionals who want to contact other professionals and build business relationships. When you want to attract or connect with a certain type of business professional, have some knowledge of their area of expertise before you make a connection with them. Again, doing research will give you important information you can use to gain an initial contact and speak their “language.”

This is not a place to chat with friends and family members. You will not find children here, so if you are marketing toys to parents and children, this platform may not work for you.

However, you may find professionals who can help you market your product, or a specialist in search engine optimization (SEO) who can help enhance your Web site and your advertising.





• Creating a professional profile


LinkedIn allows you to create a personal professional profile page. I have included a copy of my LinkedIn profile page to show one way to structure LI profiles that I and others have found effective. Here is the outline:

#1—Under my name at top is a one-sentence abstract of who I am and what I do. Note that it talks not just about me but, more important, about results I produce for clients.

#2—Instead of showing the standard head shot photo, I instead opted for an image of the cover of my book. Not only does it stand out because almost no one else does it, but it further establishes my brand as a recognized expert in my field.

#3—Scroll down a little to the paragraph “Copywriting for me is thrilling,” which communicates my love of my profession and my objective, which is to win sales for my clients, not creative awards.



#4—My capabilities and the types of work I do are denoted in a bulleted list with the items in all caps (e.g., CONTENT MARKETING) to make them stand out.

#5—Each area has a concise, one-sentence description so the list does not have a lot of text, looks very clean, and is easy to scan quickly.

#6—In the bullets I don’t focus on what the item is, but instead give highly specific results, with numbers. Numbers increase readership and results are what matter to potential clients.

#7—Even though there is a button under my name at the top for sending me a message, after the bulleted list I also give my phone number and invite a call. A phone icon helps attract the eye to this call to action.





• Building Your LinkedIn Post


LinkedIn post viewers like images, but cat pictures and videos will not work well on this platform. It is always best to use professional images or, if you are artistically talented, to create images that are eye-catching and interesting. As always, any image you use should relate to your topic content. Here is how to create a post on LinkedIn.

1. Create a headline that focuses on your subject content.

2. Add a few sentences of content to grab readers’ interest, about 50 to 100 characters (including spaces).

3. Either add an image of your brand logo or use a relevant topic image.

4. Add a link at the end of your content, so people can click through to your landing page or blog where they can learn more about your topic in depth. Add your call to action (CTA) there. Here are a few sample posts from some of my friends in the industry. You can see that posts are very short but effective.





TWITTER


You can use Twitter as a personal page or as a business page, or both. Twitter is a more informal platform and postings consist of short “blurbs” of up to 280 characters at most, along with a link. It depends on the content you want to share, but keep the character count down as much as possible, preferably not more than 100 characters. Concise content is easier to read when information runs about two sentences long.





• Twitter hashtags


Twitter hashtags are included at the front of a keyword or a phrase, which helps anyone searching for that topic to find your post, along with other posts fitting that trending topic. It is essentially a way to code your tweet.

For instance, #keto would help people find your tweet if they are interested in learning more about the keto diet.

The narrower and more focused the hashtag name, the more you’ll attract the prospects you want. Therefore, if you sell keto diet information, #keto will bring you more qualified views than #weightloss or #diet.

Hashtags are not tweets. They are labels on tweets that tell Twitter users what your tweet is about. So if you want to reach people who hate or love Donald Trump, use #Trump.

Search a hashtag before you use it to see which version of it is most popular, so your post is found more readily in that category.





SUMMARIZING HOW TO USE SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS


When you are starting a new professional page on a particular platform, spend time checking out how posts, especially popular posts, are being presented on the platform. Get a feel for what the “tone” of the platform is, so that you can meld with it, but still stand out in the right way through your posts.

If your goal is to use social media as part of an integrated multichannel marketing strategy to promote your business, the content can be a combination of business-related and personal.

As noted, the business content can give the reader data, links to content of interest, instruction, tips, news, or trends of interest to your target market. This content shows that you are an expert who delivers value.

The personal content is part of the online phenomenon known as transparency. People want to know more about you: who you are, your family, travels, hobbies, interests, activities.

I advise you to stay away from controversial topics such as religion, sex, and politics if you use social media to promote your business.

Why? Because it risks damage to your reputation and losing followers and potential customers. If you say that in your opinion religion is a bad thing and you do not believe in God or Jesus, what effect will that have on prospects who are devoted Christians? Giving such an opinion may offend and anger many of your friends, followers, and contacts.

Remember what happened to Salman Rushdie when he published The Satanic Verses, the reaction to which included serious threats against his life. While that is highly unlikely to happen in reaction to one of your tweets, even a single comment can make people irate and harm your reputation. And remember, once something gets onto the Internet, it becomes highly visible and may be extremely difficult to remove.

There are many more platforms available, such as Pinterest, Instagram, Snapchat, Flickr, Nextdoor (neighborhood focused), Foursquare, Myspace, Tumblr, and more. As a final mention, many of these platforms have phone apps that allow mobile phone viewers to connect with contacts on social media platforms throughout the day.

Always check your post to see how it looks through the phone app version of any social media platform. If something does not look quite right, fix it as soon as possible. Then recheck the post again until you are happy with how it looks, and then share your post.





RESOURCES


Sources for Royalty- and Copyright-Free Images:

(Always read terms of use and check with the platform administration first)



• Unsplash.com

• Pexels.com

• Pixabay.com

• StockSnap.io



• Reshot.com

• Foodiesfeed.com (for food pictures)

• Picjumbo.com

• Lifeofpix.com



Canva.com (photos, images, illustrations, icons, other elements for creative design)

You can also resize images on Canva to fit the requirements for any social media platform. Check out the image templates listed for the social media platforms that you use.



Character Space Counter Tool



sproutsocial.com/insights/social-media-character-counter/





16



WRITING FOR VIDEO



Video is taking over marketing and the world. According to a study by Cisco, in 2019 video will have accounted for up to 80 percent of all online traffic. And consumers are 85 percent more likely to buy your product after viewing your video. I have been writing video scripts continually since 1979 and in this chapter will share the best practices.





TYPES OF VIDEO SCRIPTS


Video scripts can range from a sixty-second commercial shown at halftime during the Super Bowl to a one-hour video sales letter (VSL). Here are a few types of scripts:





• The sixty-second television advertisement


These videos can also be cut down to thirty seconds or fifteen seconds for shorter viewing times, when several ads are run together during the program break. Under this category, you will see advertisements for brands of beer, other types of drinks, food, and restaurants and commercials for car and home insurance, home improvement tools, and much more.





• Explainer video script


Explainer scripts are typically one to two minutes long and explain what a business does for its clients, how a new product works, or why you need a specific new service. One person is either on the video screen talking or is speaking in the background throughout the video. For example, a software-as-a-service (SaaS) company has come up with a new software platform geared toward dentists’ offices that consolidates all parts of the business into one platform. The SaaS president opens the first scene by stating the problem dentists’ offices have. Then the president offers a solution, and this is what viewers see in the video. The video shows the software in action, with typed lists of what reports can be pulled from the software.





• Interviewing video script


This can be done in several ways. The interviewer first develops a structure script for each part of the interview. This helps with planning a camera operation, such as moving from camera A to camera B at the right time. Think of an interview done on a news session, where a candidate for president is being interviewed.

Next, a list of leading questions is drawn up to ask the interviewee, and those are given to him or her in advance, so that the interviewee plans on what to say in the response. The responses can be written out as well, by the interviewee, so that everything is scripted for the time span allowed, say, fifteen minutes in total.

A teleprompter can be used for this, placed at and just behind camera level. This way, the interviewee remembers what he or she wanted to say for that question, yet still speaks to the audience (the camera) as well as the interviewer.





• Corporate script


A president of a company wants to create a video about the successful previous year’s financial performance, so a script is written to cover all aspects of the financial statement. The president may start speaking while facing the camera, but other video shots should pull in components of the statement created as charts and graphs to keep viewer interest engaged.

Alternatively, if the president comes off well on camera, the main shot can be on the president during the full video, interspersed with relevant graphs, tables, and charts.





• Training script


Many companies create training videos so that new employees can get up to speed with using specific software that the company uses, and how to pull reports. Training videos also incorporate best practices, company culture, behavior expectations, what is considered a firing offense, and more.

These are only a few of the types of video scripts that you might be hired to write, and more marketers are now creating videos for their own Web sites, giving a more personal touch. What was once the domain of corporations with huge budgets for marketing services and products has now become so much easier and affordable. Anyone can write and build a video if they have the talent.





• Online video script


The average online video posted on a Web site home page today is short, running two to three minutes. B2B videos have an average run time of about four minutes, and about half of viewers watch these videos in their entirety. Videos on second-level pages, especially those dealing with products and their applications, can go to five to seven minutes or longer.

As for script length, figure your narration at 120 words per minute. A ten-minute script would then have 1,200 words—the equivalent of five double-spaced pages in Word with 12-point Times Roman.

The best guideline for writing video scripts is: “One presentation, one topic.” Your video should talk about only one product, one idea, or one offer. After all, you have a limited time to tell your story before viewer attention wanes and they click away.





HOW TO START YOUR SCRIPTWRITING PROJECT


In this section, I’ll show you how to plan your script and then begin writing it. Let’s say you are hired by an agency that is creating a commercial for SaaS, the software company that has developed a new software platform for all dentists’ offices to use.

As part of the contract, it should be made clear that your client will provide you with all available information that you need to create the script, including any storyboards already completed, which can help guide your script.





• Creative brief


The creative brief that you get from your client outlines everything they have on the topic of the video, so you can build the script. This includes any discussions about how the video will be shot and who will be in it, such as hired actors or the employees of SaaS. Here is a typical list of what you want to know before creating the script.

What is the message that this software company wants everyone to know? (buy the product or service, or sign up for something)

What problem does this service or product solve for the customer?

Will the video be shot inside or outside?

Where can the customer get the product or service?





THE SCRIPT DEVELOPMENT


We will call the new software platform PantherWorks and the software company that produces it Biedermort. And let’s say there will be one on-camera speaking actor. The video will take place in an actual dentist’s office, although the name of the dentist or of the practice will not be acknowledged. The office is background material to fit the message. You will want to use an audiovisual format for the script. You should also know how many minutes the video will run for.

If your client has not created a storyboard or an outline	, you can do so, just for yourself, to guide the script. We can call this an outline script, although the actual script is not yet written. See the example below.

Scene



Visual



Audio



1



Fade in for a picture of the software’s logo called PantherWorks.



Music plays in the background as the logo or front face of the software pulls up.



2



Fade out, then in, where the speaker is standing in a dentist’s office. There are two associates seated at their desks working on their computers.



The speaker begins talking about the common problem Biedermort had heard a lot about from dentists everywhere. States that the problem has now been solved.



3



Shot switches to a screen showing the first entry into the program showing where reports can be pulled up.



The speaker describes how PantherWorks is a fully integrated software platform. Any information can be easily called up from one single platform instantly.



4



The screen changes to several types of reports printed out and laid on a desktop. Schedule, Inventory, and Monthly Report of Income.



The speaker continues with showing how reports can be custom-designed to be pulled with only a little information input.



5



The shot moves back into the office where the workers are smiling and giving thumbs-up on the product.

A Web site address is shown at the bottom of the screen.



The speaker turns to the camera and states to call a number for a consultation or to go to the Web site shown below on the screen.



Always keep in mind what the audience is seeing and hearing. Put yourself in their place and feel what they feel when seeing the video and hearing the speaker solve a problem for them.





HOW TO WRITE THE SCRIPT


Once you have the structure, you can start out by writing a sentence for each scene that informs what should be covered. That will help guide what you write for the script.

Here is what you should remember whenever you write any script for any type of video: know who your target audience is (i.e., dentists and office associates).

Always start with an introduction and make every word count. Get the message across in one to two sentences. Keep the total script to no longer than two pages with 100 to 120 words per minute.

Write concisely and effectively. Do not use fluff or big exotic words. Keep it simple.

Use the word “you” and speak conversationally to the audience.

Show what the problem was and then show how it was solved, or how it can be solved.

Show the outcome of how using the product or service makes life better and/or easier.

Give a call to action (CTA) and show how to get that product or service quickly, or how to sign up for something, such as an e-mail or a consultation.





AFTER YOU WRITE THE SCRIPT


Read it aloud and, if you want, record yourself reading it to see how it sounds when you play it back. Making a recording through your smartphone is an easy way to do this. You can time each section to see how it fits the visual scenes that will be in the video. The cadence of the script should have a natural rhythm and speed, not too fast, and not so slow that you fall asleep listening to it. Now we build the sample script, so you can see what one looks like:

TITLE: “Your Dentistry Office, Moving Faster and Better!”

LENGTH: Four (4) minutes

PRODUCT: PantherWorks Software Platform by Biedermort, Inc.

Scene



Visual



Audio



1



Fade in—logo visual for PantherWorks by Biedermort



(soft background music playing throughout the video)

Hi, I’m James Faller for Biedermort and, today, we will show you how your office at your dentistry practice can operate faster and better than ever before.

Does it take your associates 15 minutes to compile all the information you need for your next patient? That’s just too long.

And it is time and money wasted. You could be spending that time working with your patient instead.

It’s not your associates’ fault. It is the tools they’re working with.



2



Fade out logo—fade in to speaker standing in a dentist’s office. Workers at the computer.



In the last two years, we kept hearing about dentists and dental associates having problems with accessing too many databases to get the information they needed.

Patient history was a nightmare to pull together.

Treatments, recommendations, medical research, and office reports needed to be pulled daily. Too much time was involved, making office procedures very slow-moving.

So we, at Biedermort, got to work to solve the problem and came up with PantherWorks. The platform runs fast and sleek, and it is easy to operate. This will change your life.



3



A computer screen with the software opened on a selection page.



PantherWorks eliminates accessing multiple old, outdated databases.

Once all your information and data are updated and integrated, there is no more moving in and out of multiple databases, taking up too much time.

All the important information and data can be pulled up in one place, with just a few taps of the keyboard.



4



Reports on desk: Schedule, Inventory, and Monthly Report of Income.



Once you hit the Enter key, it only takes just seconds to get your report out.

We also customize reports especially for you, so you don’t have to do that.

Got a new report you want to pull every week? Let us know and we will create it for you and upload it onto your platform.

It’s fast, easy to do, and we provide initial training at the office for everyone, so the platform is up and functional immediately for everyone to use after training is completed.

Training videos are available on our Web site, so you are never left without help. If you have questions, we will answer them for you.



5



Workers happy and giving thumbs-up … Fade out …

A Web site address is shown at the bottom of the screen.



(speaker shakes hands with the dentist of the dentistry practice—speaker turns back to the camera)

So, if you want to see what PantherWorks can do for you, give us a call right away at xxx-xxx-xxxx. We will schedule a time to come to your office and consult with you and your associates.





Want to contact us online for more information and a phone call instead? Visit Biedermort.com/signup/ and connect with us there.

We can’t wait to help you and make a difference in your dentistry practice! Call xxx-xxx-xxxx now or send us a message online!





VIDEO SALES LETTERS (VSLS)


Video sales letters originally were created on a type of whiteboard screen. This is where you see a sentence typed onto the page, while a voice-over speaks the text as well. It is usually one sentence, maybe two sentences at a time for each slide.

These are presented as rather long videos and typically concern topics in the health or financial industries. They really can be about anything at all, but there is always a danger of making such a video carry on for too long, losing the viewer’s attention along the way.

Video clips can be short, but for direct response marketing, video sales letters typically run fifteen to forty-five minutes or longer; the script is around 2,000 to 7,000 words.

A key difference between video sales letters and static (landing pages or print) sales letters is this: a prospect may read a conventional text sales letter several times and can go back to reread portions if desired. And they often do. But the prospect can only watch an entire video sales letter straight through; she has no ability to choose the portions she views.

That in mind, here are some guidelines for writing effective video sales letters:

1. The way to begin is to grab audience attention with a statement that breaks them out of their normal pattern. Surprise them. Shake them up.

2. Tell an engaging story that sweeps the listener along with it. Superstar marketer Michael Masterson calls this the “velvet slide.”

3. Keep is simple. The “information density”—the number of facts per page—should be about 20 percent less than a text-based promotion.

4. Use short sentences and especially short words. I don’t use any word longer than 9 letters.

5. Use short paragraphs—a couple of sentences is typical. This makes the text on the video easier to read.

6. If you want to dramatize or prove a copy claim or fact, you can insert a chart or graph into the video presentation. Even if the prospect has only a few seconds to view it, charts and graphs give the impression that your point is well backed up.

7. You can concisely state the problem your product solves in the lead of the video sales letter, but be sure to explain the solution within the first minute or two. If you wait too long to get to the solution, you risk having the prospect click away in boredom.

8. Don’t use more than two numbers in a sentence. If you do, round off at least one of them.

9. The tone of the copy should be positive and enthusiastic because the prospect hears a voice reading the text. But it should also sound authoritative.

When I talk about video sales letters, invariably I hear the objection, “They’re too long! I always click away. Who would sit there for thirty minutes and watch?”

But plenty of people do. How do I know? Testing shows repeatedly that video sales letters usually generate higher conversion rates than static landing pages.

If you still object to video sales letters because you just don’t like them, I quote this advice from ace copywriter Peter Beutel: “Don’t let personal preference get in the way.”





RESOURCES


The Voice Realm


Go here to upload your script into this time counter, known as the Voice Over Estimate, to see how long your script will be as a video.

https://www.thevoicerealm.com/count-script.php





Whiteboard Animation Videos


These are software platforms that allow you to create videos using preinstalled characters, backgrounds, items such as tables, chairs, clocks, and much more. You create your own scene by placing the components onto the page, and when you run it the platform will “draw” it.

VideoScribe: https://www.videoscribe.co/en/Whiteboard-Animation

Renderforest: https://www.renderforest.com/whiteboard-animation

Animaker: https://www.animaker.com/blog/how-to-create-whiteboard-video/

Rawshorts: https://www.rawshorts.com/

Explee: https://explee.com/

If you want to create your own videos from start to finish, you can use one of the programs below.

Video Editing Software:

Windows 10 Video Editor program

Adobe Premiere Pro (comes with the Creative Cloud package or separate, if preferred)

Apple Final Cut Pro X (for Macs)

Adobe Premiere Elements (geared toward beginners)





17



WRITING FOR CONTENT MARKETING



Content marketing—giving away free information to build your brand, increase response to marketing campaigns, convert more online traffic, and educate the prospect on your technology, methodology, products, and services—is one of the hot trends