ities, courses and seminars, resorts and vacation trips, digital watches, smartphones, and home-exercise equipment.

Many other products don’t have a lot of features and benefits, and there isn’t too much you can say about them. These include soft drinks, fast food, candy, chewing gum, beer, wine, liquor, jewelry, lingerie, cologne, perfume, soap, laundry detergent, cosmetics, linens, pet food, and shampoo.

For example, there isn’t much you can say about a new ginger ale, other than it tastes good and costs less.

But an automatic food processor has a lot of benefits you can highlight. It saves time. It eliminates messy chopping and cutting. It makes cooking easier and more pleasant. It can slice, dice, mash, peel, whip, blend, chop, and crush virtually any food. You can use it for desserts, appetizers, salads, and main courses. It can process fruits, vegetables, meats, nuts, cheeses.

So the length of the copy depends on the product and what there is to say about it.

Second, the length of the copy depends upon the audience. Some customers don’t need a lot of information and are not accustomed to reading long text. Others seek out all the facts they can get and will devour as much as you can provide.

A book club wanted to know how much copy to include in the direct-mail package it used to get new members to join the club. It tested sales letters of various lengths: one, two, four, eight, and twelve pages. The twelve-page letter pulled the most orders. Why? One of the reasons is that people who will join a book club are readers—and they will read twelve pages of text if it interests them.

Businesspeople whose service or product revolves around intellectual property or technical methodology often write books outlining their approach to their service (e.g., investment management). Many have told me the same thing: “A prospect who has actually read the book becomes a better potential client and is much more likely to become a client. We prefer an educated client. They are easier to deal with and more likely to accept our recommendations.”

The third factor in determining copy length is the purpose of the copy. If you want your copy to generate a sales lead, then there’s no need to go into complete detail because you’ll get a chance to provide more information when people respond to the lead. On the other hand, an ad that asks for the order by mail must give all of the facts the reader needs to make a buying decision and order the product.

“This is all very nice,” you say, “but how do I determine the length that’s best for my product, my audience, and my purpose?”

Fortunately, there’s an answer. I’ve developed a tool, which I call the Copy Length Grid (fig. 4.1), that can enable us to determine copy length in a somewhat more scientific and semiquantitative fashion.

The Copy Length Grid says there are two major factors determining whether long or short copy will work best for your promotion: emotion and involvement.

Emotion refers to the degree to which the purchase is emotional. Buying a diamond engagement ring is a highly emotional purchase. But you are moved very little emotionally when deciding which brand of paper clips to buy.

Fig. 4.1: Copy Length Grid



Involvement refers to how much time, effort, and thought goes into the product purchase. As with most large purchases, a lot of consideration goes into the selection and purchase of a diamond engagement ring. But most of us grab the first box of paper clips on the shelf of the stationery store without giving it a second thought.

To use this system for determining copy length, rate these two criteria—emotion and involvement—as high or low. This dictates what quadrant of the Copy Length Grid you end up in, which in turn gives you at least a rough guideline for copy length.

For instance, the highly emotional purchase of a diamond engagement ring is a “considered purchase”—something you give a lot of thought to—so it rates high in involvement. As you can see in the diagram, this puts us firmly in the upper left quadrant of the grid, indicating that long copy is appropriate for this offer.

On the other hand, paper clips are more of an impulse purchase: we go to the store and pick up the first box we see, providing it’s the right size. There’s no emotion and very little thought that goes into this purchase.

This puts us in the lower right quadrant of the grid, which indicates that writing long, passionate copy about paper clips probably isn’t going to sell more of them.

Of course, the Copy Length Grid is only a rough guide, not a precise analyzer. A number of other factors must also be taken into account when determining copy length. These factors include:

•  Price. The more expensive a product is, the more copy you generally need to sell it. Lots of copy is needed to build the case for value before asking for the order, so that when the price is finally given, it seems like a drop in the bucket compared to what the buyer is getting in return.

•  Purpose. Copy that sells the product directly off the printed page or screen (known as “one-step” or “mail-order” copy) usually has to be long, because it must present all product information and overcome all objections. Copy designed to generate a lead (“two-step copy”) can be short, since a catalog, brochure, or salesperson will have the opportunity to present product details and overcome objections later.

•  Audience. People who are pressed for time, such as busy executives and professionals, often respond better to short copy. (Business-to-business copywriter Steve Slaunwhite notes: “The B2B writing style tends to be clear, fact-based, conversational, and focused on down-to-earth performance expectations rather than overblown promises.”2) Prospects with more time on their hands, such as retirees, as well as those with a keen interest in your offer, such as hobbyists, are more likely to read long copy.

•  Importance. Products that people need (a refrigerator, an air conditioner) can be sold with short copy because … well, the prospect has to buy them. Products that people want but don’t have to buy (exercise videos, self-help audio programs, financial newsletters) must be “sold,” and require long copy to do so.

•  Familiarity. Short copy works well with products the prospect is already familiar with and understands. This is why vouchers and double postcards are used so frequently to sell subscriptions to popular, well-known magazines (Newsweek, Businessweek).

Based on the Copy Length Grid and these other factors, it’s clear that long copy is not always better, and there are many instances when short or almost no copy works best. This is the case with items that “sell themselves,” such as staplers or garden hoses.

But for items that have to be “sold”—life insurance policies, luxury automobiles, IT systems, collectibles, high-end jewelry, career training—long copy is often required because of the high degree of emotion and involvement.

Don’t be afraid of long copy. Include as many facts as it takes to make the sale.

At the same time, other factors also affect copy length. For instance, in a banner ad or Google pay-per-click ad, you are limited to short copy. When the user clicks the ad, he is taken to an online sales page where now you have room to say as much as you need to close the deal.





GENERATIONAL MARKETING


Today, perhaps more than ever, advertisers are targeting their marketing to specific generations, the most prevalent being baby boomers and millennials. Table 4-1 provides a quick overview of the various generations including their ages, interests, attitudes, and lifestyles.3, 4, 5

Because of the accelerated pace at which technology is developing, the volatile economy, geopolitical instability, and longer life spans, the generations perhaps differ even more sharply than in decades past—and for that reason, marketing targeting specific generations has become commonplace and extremely effective.

Table 4-1. Generational marketing.





POSITIONING


Al Ries and Jack Trout, authors of Positioning: The Battle for Your Mind, write: “Today, positioning is used in a broader sense to mean what the advertising does for the product in the prospect’s mind. In other words, a successful advertiser today uses advertising to position his product, not to communicate its advantages or features.”

For instance, Coors is positioned as a fresh, pure beer made from the water of the Rocky Mountains. Heineken is positioned as a premium beer “crafted by connoisseurs.”

Positioning does not take the place of features and benefits and sales arguments; it complements them. If your product fills a special niche, positioning it against a well-known brand is a quick and effective way of establishing the product’s identity in the consumer’s mind.

But your copy must do more than get the consumer to think about the product; it must also persuade him to buy it. And you can’t persuade consumers to buy unless you tell what the product can do for them and why the product does it better than other products can.





5



GETTING READY TO WRITE



Helmut Krone, the art director who helped create such classic campaigns as Avis’s “We Try Harder,” Volkswagen’s “Think Small,” and Mennen’s “Thanks, I Needed That,” had a basic approach to tackling advertising assignments: “I start with a blank piece of paper and try to fill it with something interesting.”

But what exactly should the copywriter do to prepare himself for facing that blank piece of paper or empty screen? What information do you need before you’re ready to write your copy? How do you go about collecting this information? How do you develop advertising ideas?

This chapter provides answers to these questions and outlines specific techniques you can use to gain familiarity with a product and its market before you tackle your copywriting assignment.





COPYWRITING RESEARCH


There are three basic steps I take to do research on the product, technology, competition, and market for my copywriting assignments.

Step #1—Start with the client.

Most have a wealth of material they can share with you. You simply have to know what to ask for … and it starts with this: https://www.bly.com/newsite/Pages/documents/HTPFAC.html

Step #2—Hire an online researcher.

Not to do all of your online research—but to save you time finding both ordinary statistics and obscure data.

My online researcher has written an inexpensive e-book on this topic: http://www.fastonlineresearch.com/

Step #3—Then do your own online research.

In some cases, you don’t know that an article or paper provides useful information for your copywriting until you find it or even stumble across it—similar to browsing shelves at your local library and bookstore.

Are there other steps you can take and resources you can explore to find great source material for copywriting assignments? Yes, many. But start with the three listed here.

Note: The Word References feature makes it easy to add footnotes to all information you took from other sources, so if a statement in your copy is questioned, you have backed it up with proper attribution.





ONLINE RESEARCH: A QUICK OVERVIEW


The major search engines are those that have large indexes, are better known and heavily used. For researchers, well-known search engines generally mean more dependable results. When you find similar results in multiple sources, you have a higher degree of confidence. Because these major search engines are commercially backed, they are more likely to be well maintained, updated often, and keep pace with the ever-growing amount of online data.

I assume that you have some familiarity with Google, Yahoo!, Bing, and other major search engines. So in this section, I’m not going waste your time on the basics. Rather, let’s focus on how to find information on the Web that you can trust as accurate and reliable.

The Stanford (University, California) Persuasive Technology Lab and Makovsky Company Study about Web credibility1 defines credibility as believability, and it points out that credibility is a perceived quality rather than a piece of information.

Credibility perception results from evaluating multiple criteria simultaneously. These criteria reside within two categories: expertise of the Web site and its trustworthiness. Many considerations go into each of them.

Some of the characteristics of a credible site are2:

It acknowledges author’s name, institution, or organization with which the author is associated (if any), and current contact information.

It gives author’s credentials and qualifications.

It provides a complete list of citations. Additionally, you should ask yourself if the sources are authoritative.

Its information is current (updated, no dead links, no old news, etc.).

Clues of author’s bias are minimal: the author does not try to sell the product or service he’s talking about, and advertising on the Web site is minimal or absent.

“Coverage” is not conditional: you can view the information without limitation of fees, browser technology for pay, or software requirement.



Some of the most reliable sources on the Web include3 sites that are maintained by institutions or professional associations. The professional Web site may include research, resources, fact sheets, white papers, reports, surveys, press releases, and more. These Web sites are usually credible, especially when the institution or the association is legitimate and even prestigious.

When an online article provides only links to other sources, the credibility should be judged for each linked source separately, as it no longer reflects the original organization’s credibility. Among other trustworthy sources for researching market, application, and technology for writing assignments:

Articles from peer-reviewed scientific and medical journals, found mostly with the aid of scholarly search engines

Financial sites such as Yahoo!’s

Major news sources such as the New York Times, USA Today

Major business news sources such as Businessweek, Kiplinger’s

Official government sources for statistical data

Professional sites





HOW TO PREPARE FOR A COPYWRITING ASSIGNMENT


Here’s a four-step procedure you can use to get the information you need to write persuasive, fact-filled copy for your clients:





Step 1: Get All Previously Published Material on the Product


For an existing product, there’s a mountain of content the client can send to the copywriter as background material. This information includes:

Tear sheets of previous ads

Brochures

Annual reports

Catalogs

Article reprints

Technical papers

Copies of speeches and presentations

Audiovisual scripts

Press kits

Market research

Advertising plans

Web sites

Letters from users of the product

Back issues of e-newsletters

Files of competitors’ ads and sales literature

Internal memos

Letters of technical information

Product specifications, blueprints, plans

Illustrations and photos of product prototypes

Engineering drawings

Business and marketing plans

Reports

Proposals

Customer reviews



Ask the client to provide this background material before you attend any briefings or write the copy. One way to simplify this request for information is to create a checklist of the background material you need.

And, of course, extract as much product information as you can from the Internet. You should spend a lot of time printing out and reading the client’s Web site, or at least the pages pertaining to the product you are promoting.

Ask the client who its major competitors are, and study the content on those Web sites as well. Finally, a Google search on key words related to the product can unearth a lot of valuable information that may find its way into your copy.

By studying this background material, the copywriter should have 90 percent of the information he or she needs to write the copy. The copywriter can get the other 10 percent by asking the right questions, either in person or via e-mail, Skype, or telephone. Steps 2 through 4 outline the questions the copywriter should ask the marketer about the product, the audience, and the objective of the copy.





Step 2: Ask Questions About the Product


What are its features and benefits? (Make a complete list.)

Which benefit is the most important?

How is the product different from those of the competition? Which features are exclusive? Which are better than the competition’s?

If the product isn’t different, what attributes can be stressed that haven’t been stressed by the competition?

What technologies does the product compete against?

What are the applications of the product?

What problems does the product solve in the marketplace?

How is the product positioned against competing products?

How does the product work?

How reliable is the product? How long will it last?

How efficient is the product?

How economical?

How much does it cost?

Is it easy to use? Easy to maintain?

Who has bought the product and what do they say about it?

What materials, sizes, and models is it available in?

How quickly does the manufacturer deliver the product?

If they don’t deliver, how and where can you buy it?

What service and support does the manufacturer offer?

Is the product guaranteed?





Step 3: Ask Questions About Your Audience


Who will buy the product? (What markets is it sold to?)

What exactly does the product do for them?

Why do they need the product? And why do they need it now?

What is the customer’s main concern when buying this type of product (price, delivery, performance, reliability, service, maintenance, quality, efficiency, availability)?

What is the character of the buyer? What type of person is the product being sold to?

What motivates the buyer?

How many different buying influences must the copy appeal to? (A toy ad, for example, must appeal to both the parent and the child.)

If you are writing an ad, read issues of the magazines in which the ad will appear.

If you are writing direct mail, find out what mailing lists will be used and study the list descriptions.

If you are writing online ads, study the Web sites and e-newsletters in which they will appear.





Step 4: Determine the Objective of Your Copy


This objective may be one or more of the following:

To generate traffic

To generate conversions

To generate inquiries

To generate sales

To answer inquiries

To qualify prospects

To generate store traffic

To introduce a new product or an improvement of an old product

To keep in touch with prospects and customers

To build an opt-in e-list of prospects

To get prospects to purchase the product

To transmit news or product information

To build brand recognition and preference

To build company image

To provide marketing tools for salespeople



Before you write the copy, study the product you’re writing about: its features, benefits, past performance, applications, and markets. Digging for the facts will pay off, because in copywriting, specifics sell.





USING INTERVIEWS TO GATHER FACTS


Of course, collecting background material doesn’t always give you all the answers to the questions listed above. At times you must get additional facts from product experts employed by your client: engineers, designers, salespeople, product managers, and brand managers.

Journalists will tell you that a face-to-face interview is better than a phone interview. When you sit across the table from people, you can observe their manner, their dress, their appearance. And you can learn a lot about people from their surroundings.

But the kind of interview you conduct as a copywriter is different from the interview conducted by a reporter. You are not interested in the subject’s colorful personality or history. You are seeking only straight facts and product information of an informational nature. Therefore, there’s no need to get “up close” to the subject, and a telephone, Skype, or Zoom interview will serve your purpose just as well as an in-person conference.

Actually, there are a number of advantages to doing interviews by phone. First, although the experts have intimate knowledge of the product, advertising is usually not their area of responsibility and, since they are busy, they don’t want to get involved with it. A phone interview takes less of their time and busy managers appreciate the efficiency of this method.

Second, it’s easier to take notes by phone. Some people get jittery when they see you clicking away on your laptop. But your note taking can be invisible (turn off your Webcam); and the subject can talk in a relaxed, natural manner without being aware that his words are being transcribed.

Third, the copywriter eliminates a trip to and from the client’s office. If you’re billing by the job, this increases your profit on the assignment. If you’re billing by the hour, the time saving is passed on to the client as less time spent on research. Either way, money is saved.

A question beginning copywriters ask is, “Should I use a digital recorder or take notes on my keyboard device?” My answer is that it depends on the situation and on the assignment. By the way, if you do decide to tape the interview, be sure you let the subject know your intention before you begin.

At times, you will be forced to go to a briefing without much background material on the product or the market. In this case, new information will be given to you at a frantic rate. It may help to use a digital recorder, like a smartphone app, in these situations, unless you are fast enough at the keyboard to get it all down.

If, on the other hand, you have been thoroughly briefed and are familiar with the product, you should go into the meeting or the phone conference with a list of specific questions: gaps in your product knowledge that the background material didn’t fill. Here you are looking for short, specific answers, and taking notes with PC or pencil does the job.

I almost always e-mail that list of questions to the subject matter expert prior to our interview. About 20 percent of the time, they will type out answers and send them to me via return e-mail.

In an article in the Writer, author Dorothy Hinshaw Patent gives these tips for arranging and conducting a successful interview (the basic tips are Dorothy’s, but I’ve added some elaboration to tailor them to the needs of the copywriter).

1. When you call a person to arrange an interview, immediately say who you are, who suggested you get in touch with the person, and why you want to interview him or her.

For example: “Jim Rosenthal? Good morning. My name is Bob Bly, and I’m handling the writing of the ground radar brochure for your ad agency, Anderson & Associates. Lansing Knight at the agency suggested I give you a call and says you know a lot about the design of the radar dish. I’d like to ask you a few questions, if that’s convenient.”

At times, you will encounter resistance from the person. Here are a few tactics to overcome this:

•  Explain that the interview won’t take much time. (“Well, I’ve got a small list of just six questions in front of me, and the interview will take but ten minutes to complete. I know you’re busy, but do you think we might chat for just ten minutes sometime in the next few days?”)

•  Flatter the subject, but be sincere. (“I suppose I could talk to someone else in your department. But they told me you designed the antenna, and I’d really like to make sure I get the right information for this ad, since it’s appearing in Machine Design, Design News, and Electronics Digest.”)

•  Explain the importance of your assignment. (“The article I’m putting together will be published in this year’s annual report, so you can see why I’m trying to get the most accurate information possible.”)

•  Use authority as leverage. (“Shirley Parker, your department head, is working closely with the agency on this one and she felt it would be really important to get your input.”)

2. Let the subject select the time and date for the interview. Offer to do the interview in the morning, during lunch, after work, in the evening, or any time that’s convenient and comfortable for the person. Some people are too busy during office hours to talk with you, and would prefer to do it after 5:00 or 6:00 P.M., when they can relax. Others may find lunch to be the best time. Schedule the interview at the subject’s convenience.

And, just as important, set a firm date and time for the interview, whether it’s a face-to-face meeting or a phone call. If you’re doing a phone interview, make sure the subject understands that you are setting aside time to be by your phone on that date; the phone interview should be considered as firm a commitment as a meeting.

3. Arrange for interviews well in advance of your deadline. With advertising’s short deadlines, this isn’t always possible. So it’s best to arrange interviews the day you get the assignment. That way, if a key interview subject is out of town or unavailable to meet, you can notify your client and work around it (by extending the deadline or finding someone else to take the subject’s place).

4. Do your homework. Come prepared. Read all of the background information before the interview. Know in advance specifically what you want to find out during the interview. Prepare a written list of questions you want to ask.

The subject’s time—and your time—is money spent by the client. Don’t waste it by asking your subject to give you an education in the basics. Instead, use this valuable time with the expert to get specific, detailed product and marketing facts that the product literature and other background material didn’t provide.

5. Be on time for the interview. Many businesspeople are impatient types, and if you miss your appointment, you may never get a second chance. If you can’t avoid being late, call in advance and explain the situation.

6. If you are taking notes, type only the information you need to get the facts straight.

7. Establish a rapport with the subject. You two may not have a lot in common, but by showing an interest in and understanding of the subject’s problems, you win that person over as a friend. And friends give better interviews than hostile or indifferent subjects.

Maybe you really don’t care how difficult it was to manufacture the world’s first fiber-optic fishing pole. But the engineer you’re interviewing does. So, when he turns to you and says, “Boy, you don’t know the problems we had in adjusting tensile strength to the right length-to-diameter ratio,” give an understanding nod and a smile. Maybe even say, “I can imagine the problems you’ve had. But it sure is a great fishing pole.” This is just common courtesy, and it helps make the interview go smoothly.

8. Keep a list of the people you interviewed. Also save your notes until the copy is accepted and published and for many months after that. Refer to the list and notes if the client wants to know where you got your information or questions the accuracy of the copy.

9. Show your appreciation. You should always say “thank you” at the close of the interview. A short follow-up e-mail is an even nicer way of showing your gratitude.





ORGANIZING YOUR INFORMATION


At this point, you’ve read mounds of product literature and have taken notes or underlined key passages, or both. You also have notes or audio files of interviews with product experts. The next step in getting ready to write copy is to type up your notes on your PC and print them out for quick and easy reference.

There are two benefits to this. First, by filtering the information through your brain, to your fingers, and onto the typewritten page, you gain more familiarity with your facts.

When I was in elementary school in the 1960s, teachers often assigned simple reports that could be based entirely on articles found in the encyclopedia. Not much research was involved, and as students, we thought we were pulling the wool over the teacher’s eyes by cribbing from the World Book or Encyclopaedia Britannica.

But the teachers were smart. They knew that, by re-forming the encyclopedia essay in our own words, we would think through the ideas and come to our own conclusions about the subject.

So it is with the copywriter. As you retype interviews and previous copy in your own words, you gain a perspective on the product and generate your own ideas on how to sell it.

Now, to be fair, I know many copywriters who don’t go through this step. All I can tell you is that it works for me, and I wouldn’t tackle an assignment without first reprocessing all the information I’ve collected through my brain and keyboard and onto the printed page.

The second advantage of typing up and printing out your notes is that, by single-spacing, you can reduce hours of interviews and mounds of Web pages, white papers, and product brochures to three to ten or so sheets of paper. Instead of searching through a huge pile of research material to find a key fact, you can quickly locate it in your typed notes using the Word Find feature.

You can also use the notes as a checklist, checking off facts you have used in your copy, circling those facts you must include but haven’t yet, and crossing out information that will not be used in the copy. Also, looking at the notes is a lot easier on the eye than trying to decipher page after page of your handwriting.

Convenient as these notes are, I must tell you that once you’ve gone through the process of keying them into your PC or laptop, the material will be so fresh in your mind that you will probably be able to write the copy with only an occasional glance at the pages to confirm a fact or search for a missing bit of data.

I’ve written complete ads and e-mail marketing messages without once looking at my notes. After the copy was finished, I used the notes as a checklist to make sure all important facts were included.





SHOULD YOU MAKE AN OUTLINE FIRST?


Many copywriters debate the usefulness of preparing an outline before they write the copy. Again, this depends on your individual approach to writing, and you should make an outline only if it is helpful to you.

With most short pieces of copy—online ads, e-mails, blog posts—the number of separate sales points to be covered is small enough that I can hold the outline in my head. And so there’s no need to write it down. But if the copy has an unusually large number of sales points, or if an organizational scheme hasn’t popped into my head (as it usually does), I will open a new Word file and work up an outline.

For longer pieces—video sales letters, landing pages, white papers, Web sites—an outline is always helpful to me. I pin the outline to a cork board next to my desk and use it to guide me through the assignment. As first drafts of each section are completed, I check off the section on the outline. This gives me a sense of accomplishment and motivation to go on to the next step.

For decades, I have made a practice of showing at least a rough outline of the promotion to the client and getting approval before I proceed to a first draft. The outline consists of a working headline and a description, either in a numbered or bullet list or in paragraph form, of the theme and contents I intend to cover in the body copy.

Also called a “copy platform,” this type of outline ensures that the client agrees with your approach before you write. Without submitting a copy platform and getting it approved, you risk writing an entire promotion on a theme or concept that the client is going to reject, forcing you to write the whole thing over again. This is far less likely to occur when you are writing from an approved copy platform.

How do you organize your outline? The “motivating sequence” presented in chapter 4 is a general outline for all pieces of persuasive writing. Examples of organizational schemes for specific writing tasks—ads, brochures, YouTube videos, Facebook boosted posts, press releases, sales letters, and e-mails—are presented later in the book.





SOCIAL MEDIA AS AN INFORMATION RESOURCE


As you build your network of LinkedIn contacts, Facebook friends, and Twitter followers, you gain access to a large audience of people, some of whom may prove useful to you as you research copywriting projects.

In particular, LinkedIn has many specialty groups that focus on various disciplines, industries, and areas of knowledge. Join the groups related to the subjects you write about since their members are ideally experts in those fields, members of your target markets, or both.

You can conduct informal research just by posing questions to the groups and listening to and keeping a record of the answers. See chapter 15 for more details on how to build your social media presence, use it as a research tool, and write copy for the different ad networks.





ONLINE SURVEYS


Another way to conduct primary research online is to build an opt-in e-list. One of the best ways to do this is by adding a registration box to your Web site in which you offer a subscription to a free online newsletter published by your company.

Once you have your own e-list, you can survey your readers using an online survey tool such as SurveyMonkey. While social media research yields qualitative answers, online surveys also give you quantitative data; for instance, you can determine that X percent of the people you surveyed intend to buy a new widget in the next twelve months, or that Y percent of the list eat kale.

In addition to conducting your own surveys, a Google search can yield many surveys by others on your topic. Surveys give results as percentages, as well as ranking results in order from most to least popular answer, and numbers strengthen copy: they are specific and numbers attract the reader’s attention.





THE WRITING PROCESS


Now comes the fun part: the actual writing of the promotion.

Each writer has his or her own way of creating drafts, and you should use the method that’s most productive for you.

Some writers start with a headline and rough drawing of the visual, then fill in the body copy. They cannot write a word of body copy until they have a headline and visual concept that pleases them.

Others write the body copy first. Then they extract the headline from the body copy or from their rough notes. Some writers like to start with the longest or most difficult section of a brochure or annual report. Others prefer to “warm up” by writing the easy sections first (e.g., the order form in a direct-mail package, the About page on a Web site).

Whatever your approach to copywriting, one thing you must realize is that you’ll rarely get it right the first time. The key to writing great copy is rewriting two, three, four, five, six, seven drafts, or as many as it takes to get it right. Beginning copywriters tend to “freeze up” when faced with having to produce copy. They get nervous because they’re afraid to write bad sentences or generate lousy ideas.

But nobody has to see your first efforts, and you don’t have to get it right the first time. So don’t be afraid to write down all the ideas, phrases, slogans, headlines, sentences, and fragments that come to you. You can always delete words that don’t work. But once you have an idea or think of a way to say something, it is lost unless you write it down.

Many copywriters write much more copy than they will need in the final version. This lets them trim the fat and save only the prime cut. In the same way, you should collect much more information than you will use in the final version. This lets you be more selective in the facts you include in your copy.

Basically, copywriting can be divided into a three-stage process, although there may be several rewrites in each stage.

In the first stage, you “get it all down” on your computer. Just let the ideas flow. Don’t edit yourself; don’t stop ideas from forming. Don’t go back and fix up the words you’ve put on the page, but instead go on and keep writing as long as you have a flow of ideas and phrases you want to put down on paper.

Some writers have trouble letting their thoughts flow freely. They become inhibited and intimidated because they are “writing copy,” and that sounds like a difficult and challenging thing to do. If that’s the case with you, try pretending you’re writing a letter or e-mail to a friend to convince this friend to buy a new product you’ve become excited about. This technique seems to work, perhaps because letter and e-mail writing, unlike ad writing, are familiar, everyday tasks.

In the second stage, you edit your work. You delete unnecessary words. You rewrite awkward phrases and sentences. You read the copy aloud to make sure that it flows smoothly. And you rearrange and reorder material into a more logical sequence.

Also, you read what you’ve written to see if it conforms to your criteria for effective, persuasive copy. If it doesn’t, you rewrite to strengthen its selling power. This may involve more facts, a better headline, a stronger closing, or a different visual.

In the third stage, you “clean up” your copy by proofreading for spelling and grammar and checking the accuracy of your facts. Here’s where you make sure you are consistent in your copy. For example, you don’t want to write the company name as “GAF” in the headline and “G.A.F.” in the body copy.

Skill in copywriting, and in any type of writing, comes only with practice. As you write copy, you will learn to overcome poor stylistic habits, become more comfortable with your writing, and gain greater control over the English language.





DOCUMENTING YOUR SOURCES


As the copywriter, you are responsible for documenting the sources for all of the information you use in your copy. For instance, if you are writing a brochure for a fertility clinic and say, “One out of six couples in the U.S. is infertile,” you need to document the source.

The best method is simply to use the Word footnote or endnote feature so that every quote and fact is easily verified by the client.

After you write a promotion, keep copies of all the source documents on file for at least six to twelve months. You may even want to give a set of these documents to the client for their own files.





A TECHNIQUE FOR PRODUCING PROFITABLE ADVERTISING IDEAS


The copywriter’s job is to come up with words and ideas that sell the product or service being advertised. Where do these ideas come from? They come from an understanding of the product, the market, and the mission of the copy—which is to generate sales.

However, even the best copywriters get stuck for ideas at times. Here is a proven nine-step procedure you can follow to come up with ideas for ads, headlines, marketing campaigns, or anything else under the sun:





1. Identify the Problem


The first step in solving a problem is to know what the problem is. But many of us forge ahead without knowing what it is we are trying to accomplish. Moral: don’t apply a solution before you have taken the time to accurately define the problem.





2. Assemble Pertinent Facts


In crime stories, detectives spend most of their time looking for clues. They cannot solve a case with clever thinking alone; they must have the facts. You, too, must have the facts before you can solve a problem or make an informed decision.

Professionals in every field know the importance of gathering specific facts. A scientist planning an experiment checks the abstracts to see what similar experiments have been performed. An author writing a book collects everything he can on the subject: newspaper clippings, photos, official records, transcripts of interviews, diaries, magazine articles, and so on. A consultant may spend weeks or months digging around a company before coming up with a solution to a major problem.

Keep an organized file of the background material you collect on a project. Review the file before you begin to formulate your solution. Use your PC to take notes on your research materials. This step increases your familiarity with the background information, and can give you a fresh perspective on the problem. Also, when you type up notes you condense a mound of material into a few neat pages that show all the facts at a glance.





3. Gather General Knowledge


In copywriting, specific facts have to do with the project at hand. They include the product, the market, the competition, and the media. General knowledge has to do with the expertise you’ve developed in business and in life, and includes your storehouse of information concerning life, events, people, science, technology, management, and the world at large.

Become a student in the many areas that relate to your job. Trade journals and association Web sites are two valuable sources of industry knowledge. Subscribe to e-newsletters and trade journals that relate to your field. Scan them all, and clip and save articles that contain information that may be useful to you. Organize your clipping files for easy access to articles by subject.

Read books in your field and start a reference library. If a copywriter with twenty years of experience writes a book on radio advertising, and you buy the book, you can learn in a day or so of reading what it took him twenty years to accumulate. Take some night school courses. Attend seminars, conferences, trade shows. Make friends with people in your field and exchange information, stories, ideas, case histories, technical tips.

Most of the successful professionals I know are compulsive information collectors. You should be one, too.





4. Look for Combinations


It has been said more than once, “There’s nothing new in the world. It’s all been done before.” Maybe. But an idea doesn’t have to be something completely new. Many ideas are simply a new combination of existing elements. By looking for combinations, for new relationships between old ideas, you can come up with a fresh approach.

The Apple watch, for example, was invented by a team who combined multiple technologies including a digital watch, a smartphone, a blood pressure and heart rate monitor, apps, wireless power charging, and many others. Niels Bohr combined two separate ideas—Rutherford’s model of the atom as a nucleus orbited by electrons and Planck’s quantum theory—to create the modern view of the atom.

Look for synergistic combinations when you examine the facts. What two things can work together to form a third thing that is a new idea? If you have two devices, and each performs a function you need, can you link them together to create a new product?





5. Sleep on It


Putting the problem aside for a time can help you renew your idea-producing powers just when you think your creative well has run dry.

But don’t resort to this method after only five minutes of puzzled thought. First, you have to gather all the information you can. Next, you need to go over the information again and again as you try to come up with that one big idea. You’ll come to a point where you get bleary-eyed and punch-drunk, just hashing the same ideas over and over. This is the time to take a break, put the problem aside, sleep on it, and let your unconscious mind take over.

A solution may strike you as you sleep, shower, shave, or walk in the park. Even if it doesn’t, when you return to the problem, you will find you can attack it with renewed vigor and a fresh perspective. I use this technique in writing—I put aside what I have written and read it fresh the next day. Many times the things I thought were brilliant when I wrote them can be much improved at second glance.





6. Use a Checklist


Checklists can be used to stimulate creative thinking and as a starting point for new ideas. There are several checklists in this book you can use. But the best checklists are those you create yourself, because they are tailored to the problems that come up in your daily routine.

For example, Jill is a salesperson well versed in the technical features of her product, but she has trouble when it comes to closing a sale. She could overcome this weakness by making a checklist of typical customer objections and how to answer them. (The list of objections can be culled from sales calls made over the course of several weeks. Possible tactics for overcoming these objections can be garnered from fellow salespeople, from books on selling, and from her own trial-and-error efforts.) Then, when faced with a tough customer, she doesn’t have to reinvent the wheel but will be prepared for all the standard objections because of her familiarity with the checklist.

However, no checklist can contain an idea for every situation that comes up. Remember, a checklist should be used as a tool for creative thinking, not as a crutch.





7. Get Feedback


Sherlock Holmes was a brilliant detective. But even he needed to bounce ideas off Dr. Watson at times. As a professional writer, I think I know how to write an engaging piece of copy. But when I show a draft to my assistant, she can always spot at least a few ways to make it better.

Some people prefer to work alone. I’m one of them, and maybe you are, too. But if you don’t work as part of a team, getting someone else’s opinion of your work can help you focus your thinking and produce ideas you hadn’t thought of.

Take the feedback for what it’s worth. If you feel you’re right, and the criticisms are off base, ignore them. But more often than not, feedback will provide useful information that can help you come up with the best, most profitable ideas.

Of course, if you ask others to “take a look at this report,” you should be willing to do the same for them when they solicit your opinion. You’ll find that reviewing the work of others is both educational and fun; it’s easier to critique someone else’s work than to create your own. And you’ll be gratified by the improvements you come up with—things that are obvious to you but would never have occurred to the other person.





8. Team Up


Some people think more creatively when working in groups. The people on your team ideally have skills and thought processes that balance and complement your own. For example, in advertising, copywriters (the word people) team up with art directors (the picture people) and software engineers (the computer people).

In entrepreneurial firms, the idea person who started the company will often hire a professional manager from one of the Fortune 500 companies as the new venture grows; the entrepreneur knows how to make things happen, but the manager knows how to run a profitable, efficient corporation.

As an engineer, you may invent a better microchip. But if you want to make a fortune selling it, you should team up with someone who has a strong sales and marketing background.





9. Give New Ideas a Chance


Many businesspeople, especially managerial types, develop their critical faculties more finely than their creative faculties. If creative engineers and inventors had listened to these people, we would not have personal computers, electric cars, airplanes, lightbulbs, smartphones, or hydroelectric power.

The creative process works in two stages. The first is the idea-producing stage, when ideas flow freely. The second is the critical or “editing” stage, where you hold each idea up to the cold light of day and see if it is practical.

Many of us make the mistake of mixing the stages together, especially during the idea-producing stage, when we are too eager to criticize an idea as soon as it is presented. As a result, we shoot down ideas and make snap judgments when we should be encouraging the production of ideas. Avoid making this mistake, as many good ideas are killed this way.

The tasks and procedures outlined in this chapter may seem like a tall order. But don’t worry. You can do it. Heed this advice from Lou Redmond, a former Ogilvy & Mather copywriter: “Advertising is one of the minor arts, so don’t be intimidated by it.”





TYPES OF ADS


Are all print advertisements basically the same? Or are there different techniques for writing ads in different media or ads designed to achieve different goals?

The basics of good print advertising are the same in all media, and the next chapter outlines the nine characteristics of the successful ad. But the tone, content, and focus of the ad can vary with the purpose and the medium in which is appears.





6



WRITING PRINT ADVERTISEMENTS



Despite the downward trend of the newspaper industry, nearly $16 billion annually in the United States is still spent on newspaper ads.1 So while newspaper readership is certainly on the decline, the death of newspapers is somewhat exaggerated.

Today’s print ads perform several marketing missions, chief among them:

1. To sell products directly (mail-order advertising)

2. To generate sales leads (ads that invite you to send for a free brochure or white paper)

3. To build awareness of a product (ads for packaged goods and most consumer products of low unit cost)

4. To drive traffic to brick-and-mortar stores and e-commerce Web sites to increase sales

How do these four categories differ?

Ads that ask for the order—generate a sale directly—do a complete selling job. There is no salesperson, no showroom, no retail display, no explanatory brochure to add to the sales pitch. The ad must get attention, hook the reader, and then convince her to send in an order for a product she has never seen.

Mail-order ads are usually lengthy (a half-page newspaper ad can run 1,000 words or more), because they must give complete information. They must answer all of the buyer’s questions, lay his fears to rest, and overcome all of his objections in order to close the sale. They must also devote space to the mechanism used in placing the actual order: a Web site link, coupon, toll-free number, or other device.

Ads appealing to buyers in business and industry usually try to generate a sales lead: a response from an interested buyer asking for more information. This is because most products sold to business and industry cannot be sold directly, but require a salesperson to give a presentation and close the sale in person.

Ads that generate leads may give a lot of information or a little, but they never give the full story. To get complete information, the reader must respond to the ad by writing, phoning, mailing in a coupon, or going to a URL. To write a successful lead-generating ad, you must understand the steps in the buying process and where the ad fits in.

Some consumer products are not sold by mail or by salespeople; instead, you can buy them at supermarkets, in department stores, in automobile showrooms, and at fast-food chains. And you usually buy them only when you need them, not when you read an ad about them.

Therefore, the ads for these products don’t sell them directly; they seek to generate an awareness of the product and a desire to use it. The ad campaign builds this awareness and desire over an extended period. Burger King knows you don’t always rush out to buy a Whopper after viewing a Burger King commercial. The goal of its advertising is to make Burger King the first place you think of when you want a hamburger, so you will eat their product instead of McDonald’s or Wendy’s.

Some ads promote companies instead of products. This type of advertising, known as corporate advertising, seeks to create a certain image of the company in the mind of the reader. Sometimes these campaigns are aimed at the general public to clear up a misconception about a firm or promote the firm in a general sense. More often they are aimed at stockholders, investors, and the business community. You can find examples of corporate advertising in any issue of Forbes, Fortune, or Businessweek.

Ads also differ according to the type of medium in which they appear: newspaper, magazine, directory, or online ad. Newspapers have long been the backbone of retail advertising campaigns. Retailers run what is called “price and where to buy” advertising—simple display ads that emphasize the price of the merchandise and then direct local consumers to a nearby retail outlet to make the purchase. Such ads usually center around a storewide sale or price-off deal for certain items.

Of course, newspapers attract many other advertisers besides retailers: banks, insurance companies, real estate agents, theaters, restaurants, book publishers, exercise products, and dietary supplements. Some use the simple price-and-where-to-buy format of retailers. Others run more sophisticated campaigns closer to magazine advertisements.

Magazines are different from newspapers in two important ways. First, newspapers are written for a general readership, whereas magazines are published for specialized audiences: women, teens, Christians, business executives, techies, plumbers, engineers, geologists, writers. As a result, magazines are effective for reaching small segments of the market, whereas newspapers are a medium of mass advertising.

Second, the reproduction quality of magazines is far superior to newspapers. Plus, magazines offer the advertiser the use of full color in their advertisements.

Manufacturers use magazines for campaigns that build product awareness and company image. Many consumer magazines have special sections for mail-order advertisements.

There are several advertising options on the Internet. Once the most prevalent was banner advertising, but the response to banner ads has been declining for years. A growing number of PC users have filters that prevent pop-up ads from cluttering their screens. In a 2016 survey of desktop Internet users, 26 percent said that they use ad blockers so they do not see online ads.2

An alternative to banner advertising is to run small ads in online newsletters, also known as “e-zines.” These ads consist of short text (50 to 100 words is typical) with a hyperlink to a Web site giving more information about the product being advertised.

Whether it is published in a newspaper or a magazine, on a Web site or in an online newsletter, your ad has to work hard to get the reader’s attention. The reader, after all, bought the publication or clicked to the Web site for the articles and content, not for the ads. In most major newspapers, for example, your ad competes with hundreds of other ads. And most readers read only a few of the ads in a typical magazine. So the headline and visual must stop the reader in her tracks with an attention-getting concept centered around a strong reader benefit or the promise of a reward.

The size of your ad also affects your approach to writing the copy. A full-page magazine or newspaper ad gives you great flexibility in the size of the illustrations and the amount of copy you use. (Although it is usually shorter, a magazine ad consisting of solid text can contain more than 1,000 words.)

Brand advertisers frequently use full-page ads as the “core” of their campaign for building image and awareness; smaller ads are used for generating sales leads. Many mail-order advertisers have also had great success with smaller ads.





HOW TO WRITE A GOOD ADVERTISEMENT


The techniques used in different advertising situations—magazines versus newspapers, mail order versus image, business versus consumer—are important, to be sure. But the basics of good print advertising are pretty much the same no matter what medium you’re writing for.

Here are nine criteria that an ad must satisfy if it is to be successful as a selling tool:





1. The headline contains an important consumer benefit, or news, or arouses curiosity, or promises a reward for reading the copy.


An ad for a long-distance network had the headline, “How to Cut Your Company’s Long-Distance Phone Bill 50% or More.” The benefit and the reward are clear: you will find out how to cut your phone bill in half if you read the ad.

A savings or discount is one of the most powerful benefits you can feature in a headline. An example is the headline for a mail-order ad offering a podcast on “assertiveness skills.” The headline reads: “For $30 you can acquire the same Assertiveness Skills that are now being taught to Fortune 500 managers for up to $5,000 a day.”

Never mind that streaming mp3 audio is different from live seminars; this headline creates the impression that you can acquire new knowledge for $4,770 less than others have paid for it: a good bargain, simply but powerfully stated.

Century 21’s recruitment ad for real estate agents is also direct: “You Can Make Big Money in Real Estate Sales Right Now.” No clever copy. No puns. No fancy photography or special effects. Just an irresistible promise stated in plain, straightforward language.





2. The visual (if you use a visual) illustrates the main benefit stated in the headline.


Note that I said “if you use a visual.” Contrary to what some folks may tell you, it is the words, not the pictures, that do most of the selling in many advertisements. Hundreds of successful ads have used words alone to get their message across. Thousands of other successful ads are adorned only with simple photos, spot drawings, and plain-Jane graphics.

If possible, the visual should illustrate the benefit stated in the headline. One of the most effective visual techniques for doing so is the use of before-and-after photos.

DuPont’s ad for Teflon explains how coating industrial-process equipment with Teflon protects it from acid. There are two photos. One shows an uncoated mixing blade reduced to scrap by industrial acids. The other shows a Teflon-coated blade used in the same corrosive chemicals; the Teflon blade is in perfect condition. What better way to illustrate and prove the benefit of using Teflon?

A Johnson & Johnson ad headline contains a strong benefit: “Now, from Johnson & Johnson, Toys That Allow Babies to Master New Skills.” The photo shows a toddler playing with and obviously enjoying one of the toys. The visual illustrates the benefit of the product and offers proof that babies like these toys.

A visual doesn’t have to be elaborate to illustrate the benefit. An ad for homeowners insurance can show the safe, cozy home the insurance helped pay for after the family’s first home burned down.

Visuals benefit from captions. The caption either explains what you want the reader to pay attention to in the photo or emphasizes an important fact (e.g., the product is so popular, the factory can barely keep up with the orders, using scarcity as an act-now incentive).





3. The lead paragraph expands on the theme of the headline.


A few examples:

THE WORSE YOUR CORROSION PROBLEMS, THE MORE YOU NEED DUPONT TEFLON

In harsh, highly corrosive chemical process environments, fluid handling components lined or made with DuPont TEFLON® resins and films consistently outlast other materials.

YOU CAN MAKE BIG MONEY IN REAL ESTATE SALES RIGHT NOW

Business is booming at CENTURY 21. And so are careers. CENTURY 21 offices have helped more people to achieve rewarding careers in real estate than any other sales organization in the world.

NOW, FROM JOHNSON & JOHNSON, TOYS THAT ALLOW BABIES TO MASTER NEW SKILLS

Your child is growing bigger. Brighter. More curious and eager to learn every day. That’s why Johnson & Johnson Child Development Toys are designed to change and grow with your child. To encourage his skill development every step of the way.





4. The layout draws readers into the ad and invites them to read the body copy.


Copywriters must consider the graphic elements of the ad and how these graphics will affect readership of their copy. Will the copy be broken up by subheads into many short sections? Will there be a coupon? Should the phone number be in larger type to encourage call-ins? Should the product or process be illustrated using a number of small secondary photos with captions? These are all the concerns of the writer.

The key to getting the ad read is a layout that is clean, uncluttered, and easy on the eyes. The layout should catch the reader’s eye and move it logically from headline and visual to body copy to logo and address.

Chapter 19 covers graphics in detail. But here are some factors that enhance the readability and eye appeal of a layout:

Use one central visual.

Headline set in large, bold type.

Body copy set underneath headline and visual.

Body copy set in clear, readable type.

Space between paragraphs increases readability.

Subheads help draw the eye through the text.

Copy should be printed black on a white background. Copy printed in reverse, on a tint, or over a visual is difficult to read.

Short paragraphs are easier to read than long ones.

The lead paragraph should be very short—less than three lines of type, if possible.

Simple visuals are best. Visuals with too many elements in them confuse the reader.

The best layout is a simple layout: headline, large visual, body copy, logo. Additional elements—a subhead, a sidebar, secondary photos—can enhance the ad’s readability, but too many make it cluttered and unappealing to the eye.

Many art directors believe that ads must have a large amount of “white space” (blank space) or else they will look cluttered and people won’t read them. But if your typography is clean and readable, you can set a solid page of text and people will read every word of it.



In the same way, there are certain visual techniques that make ads unappealing to readers. These techniques give ads an “addy” look and should be avoided. They include:

Headlines and blocks of copy set on a slant

Reverse type (white letters on a black background)

Tinting of black-and-white photographs with a second color (usually blue or red)

Tiny type (smaller than 8-point type)

Long, unbroken chunks of text

A long listing of company locations and addresses crammed in under the logo

Type set in overly wide columns

Poorly executed or reproduced artwork and photography



The look of your ad—its appearance, its layout, how the elements are set up on the page—won’t make an ad with poor copy effective. But an unappealing layout can discourage interested consumers from reading brilliant copy that has a lot to offer them. Again, chapter 19 covers the basics of what copywriters need to know about designing ads.





5. The body copy covers all important sales points in logical sequence.


The effective ad tells an interesting, important story about the product. And, like a novel or short story, the copy must be logically organized, with a beginning, a middle, and an end.

If you are describing a product and its benefits, you will probably organize your sales points in order of importance, putting the USP in the headline and taking the reader from the major benefits to minor features as you go through the body copy. In this format, the ad resembles the “inverted pyramid” style used by journalists in news stories.

If the sales points are not related in any way, you might prefer to use a list format, in which you simply list the sales points in simple 1-2-3 fashion.

If you are writing a case history or testimonial ad, you can use chronological order to relate the story as it happened. Or you might use a problem/solution format to show how the product solved a problem.





6. The copy provides the information needed to convince the greatest number of qualified prospects to take the next step in the buying process.


The length and number of sales points to be included in the copy depends on what you’re selling, who you’re selling it to, and what the next step is in the buying process.

Here are some observations on ad length that come from flipping through a single issue of Good Housekeeping magazine:

•  A full-page ad for Sophia perfume shows a color photo of the perfume bottle superimposed against a background of fireworks. The ad contains no body copy, just a headline and tagline.

SOPHIA IS DESIRE.

SOPHIA IS MYSTERY.

SOPHIA IS FANTASY.

SOPHIA BY COTY. WEAR IT WITH A PASSION.

Apparently, there is not a lot to say about perfume; it is sold on the mystique of what wearing perfume does to enhance your sex appeal.

•  An ad for Caltrate 600, a calcium supplement, contains a diagram, a chart, more than four hundred words of body copy, and a straightforward headline announcing, “New Caltrate 600 Helps Keep Bones Healthy.” Apparently, there is a lot to say about health products. The ad also invites the reader to write in for a price-off coupon for the product and a “calcium counter.”

•  Many food ads contain recipes that center around the product being advertised. The food advertiser hopes the reader will like the recipe and, as a result, purchase the product every time he or she makes the dish.

•  The ads for more expensive items—blenders, juicers, flooring, DNA test kits, dentures, real estate—all invite the reader to write or phone for additional information. The advertiser knows there is more to say about these products than can be put in a newspaper or magazine ad; brochures, Web sites, and salespeople will have to augment the efforts of the ad.

When you sit down to write your ad, ask yourself: “What do I want the reader to do? And what can I tell him that will get him to do it?”





7. The copy is interesting to read.


“You cannot bore people into buying your product,” writes David Ogilvy in Ogilvy on Advertising. “You can only interest them in buying it.”

People will read your ad only as long as it is interesting to them. They will not read copy that is boring, in content or in style.

As a writer and a reader, you know when writing is interesting to read and when it is dull. The style should be crisp, lively, and light. The copy should have rhythm and clarity.

But great style won’t save an ad without substance. The copy must appeal to the reader’s self-interest. It must contain benefits, or news, or it must solve the reader’s problem. It cannot entertain for entertainment’s sake; it must present compelling reasons why the product is desirable to the reader.

Here are a few things that add interest to advertisements:

Copy that speaks directly to the reader’s life, the reader’s emotions, the reader’s needs and desires

Copy that tells a story

Copy about people

Copy written in a personal style, so that it sounds like a letter from a friend: warm, helpful, and sincere

Testimonials from celebrities

A free offer (of a gift, a pamphlet, a brochure, or a sample)

Copy that contains important news, especially practical advances in health care and medical science

Copy that addresses major issues: beauty, health, old age, parenting, marriage, home, security, family, careers, education, social issues

Copy that answers questions readers have in their minds

Copy about a subject that interests the reader



Here are some things that make ads boring:

Copy that centers on the manufacturer—that talks about the company, its philosophy, its success

Copy that talks only about how the product is made or how it works rather than what it can do for the reader

Copy that tells readers things they already know

Long-winded copy with big words, lengthy sentences, and large unbroken chunks of text

Copy in which all sentences are the same length (varying sentence length adds snap to writing)

Copy that gives only product features and not benefits

Copy without a point of view—without a strong selling proposition or a cohesive sales pitch (such copy presents the facts without really showing the reader how these facts relate to his needs)

Ads with cluttered layouts and poorly reproduced visuals that look boring and turn the reader off





8. The copy is believable.


“Cynicism and suspicion abound today,” said ad agency owner Amil Gargano, “much of it with good reason. That’s why advertising won’t work unless it is trusted, no matter how clever it might seem. And the way to be trusted is to be honest and sensitive to the people you want to reach.”

The copywriter’s task is not an easy one. In addition to getting attention, explaining the product, and being persuasive, you must overcome the reader’s distrust and get her to believe you.

We’ve already discussed a number of techniques for building credibility: testimonials, demonstrations, research tests. But these are just techniques. The key to being believed is to tell the truth.

This is not as radical as it sounds. Contrary to the image of advertising executives as slick hucksters, many are honest, professional businesspeople who believe in the products they’re selling. They would not create advertising for a product that is harmful or inferior. And, although ethics plays a part, the real reason for this is a simple fact about advertising.

Clever advertising can convince people to try a bad product once. But it can’t convince them to buy a product they’ve already tried and didn’t like.

So you see, there’s no percentage in writing ads that tell lies. Besides being unethical, it’s unprofitable for the agency and the advertiser, and it gives advertising a bad name.

Fewer and fewer practitioners engage in such unethical behavior. The majority believe that the product they are advertising can do you a lot of good. When you believe in your product, it’s easy to write copy that is sincere, informative, and helpful. And when you are sincere, it comes across to readers and they believe what you’ve written.





9. The ad asks for action.


The ad should ask the reader to take the next step in the buying process, whether that step is to send in an order, call a sales office, visit a store, try a sample, see a demonstration, or go to a Web site or landing page.

You are already familiar with coupons, toll-free numbers, and other devices used to urge the reader to respond to the ad. Barry Kingston, merchandising director of Opportunity magazine, gave these tips on getting the best response to your ad:

Use a street address instead of a post office box number. A street address gives the impression that your firm is large, stable, and well established.

If most of the magazine’s readers qualify for your offer, use a toll-free number to increase response. But if you want to qualify your leads, use a regular company phone number.

If the product can be ordered directly with a credit card, include a toll-free number.

Use a company phone number to add credibility to both e-commerce and print advertising.

A coupon boosts response between 25 and 100 percent.

Asking the reader to send in a letter reduces response but produces highly qualified leads (people with genuine interest in the product).





DOES YOUR AD NEED A SLOGAN?


A slogan, also known as the tagline, is a phrase or sentence that appears beneath the company logo in an ad or series of ads. The slogan is used to sum up the central message of the ads, or to make a broad statement about the nature of the company.

Some well-known slogans:

WE’RE AMERICAN AIRLINES: DOING WHAT WE DO BEST

MAXWELL HOUSE: GOOD TO THE LAST DROP

LIKE A GOOD NEIGHBOR, STATE FARM IS THERE

NOTHING BEATS A GREAT PAIR OF L’EGGS

PRUDENTIAL: GET A PIECE OF THE ROCK

IF THEY COULD JUST STAY LITTLE TILL THEIR CARTER’S WEAR OUT

LONG DISTANCE: THE NEXT BEST THING TO BEING THERE

AMERICAN EXPRESS: DON’T LEAVE HOME WITHOUT IT

These slogans have built consumer awareness of brand-name products because they are pithy and memorable, and because they sum up the nature of the product or service. However, there are hundreds of slogans that have been used for a few months and then dropped from ads, never to be written or uttered again.

Should you use a slogan in your ad?

It depends on whether your product lends itself to this technique. In copywriting, the rule should be “Form follows function.” In other words, use a technique if it works and seems natural. But don’t force-fit a copy technique in an ad where it doesn’t belong.

Applying this rule to slogans, I’d say use a slogan if your product’s key selling proposition or its nature can be summed up in a single, catchy statement. But if the essence of your product or business can’t be captured in a one-liner, don’t force it, or the result will be an artificial slogan that detracts from the ad and makes you, your ad agency, your employees, and your customers embarrassed and uncomfortable.

For example, let’s say your company manufactures flypaper. The company president says, “Our slogan should be: The Leader in Quality Flypaper.” But this slogan restricts you to a narrow product category. If you decide to expand and manufacture flyswatters, you’ll have a hard time because people will think of you as a flypaper company only.

Then your ad agency says, “Let’s think big. You’re not just in flypaper; you’re in ‘pest control.’ How about ‘Leaders in the Science of Pest Control’ as a slogan?” But this is too general. Pest control can be anything from spraying termites to catching rats. And your company really doesn’t plan to get involved in these areas.

So the danger with slogans is that some are too narrow and pigeonhole you in a specialty, while others are so broad-based that they lose any real meaning or applicability to your business.

Slogans work best when they are memorable and when they are repeated to the target audience numerous times over a prolonged period. For instance, Allstate’s slogan has been “You’re in Good Hands” since 1950.





MANUSCRIPT FORMAT FOR AD COPY


Today most of my copy is sent to clients via e-mail as attached Microsoft Word files, a Dropbox folder, or Google Docs. If your clients are PC literate, they can use the Word “Track Changes” feature to make their comments on your copy, eliminating the need to print it out and mark it up by hand.

Some copywriters include labels in their copy that indicate whether the text the reviewer is reading is for a headline, subhead, body copy, caption, boxed material, or the description of a visual. Some writers type these descriptions in parentheses in the left margin. I type them in capital letters flush against the left margin, with a colon following the label but with no parentheses. This way, my manuscript looks very neat because everything is flush with the left margin.

A sample page of manuscript is shown here:

ThermoPal ad—page 1

HEADLINE:

How to Keep Your Iced Tea on Ice

VISUAL:

Tall glass of iced tea sitting next to an open ThermoPal thermos.

COPY:

Nothing quenches thirst like a cold iced tea on a hot summer’s day.

But the tea in a can or a carton won’t stay cool in summer heat. And an ordinary thermos won’t fit in your briefcase or bag or lunch box.

Introducing ThermoPal, the pint-size thermos that makes sure your cool summer drinks stay cool … and is small enough to go where you go.

SUBHEAD:

A big gulp in a tiny bottle

COPY:

ThermoPal is tiny enough to fit in the slimmest briefcase or in a tightly packed backpack. But it’s big enough to hold a frosty 8 ounces of tea, lemonade, or fruit juice. That’s as much as you get in a tall, cool glass at home or from a machine.

But by carrying your lunchtime drink in ThermoPal, your refreshment costs a few pennies instead of a dollar or more, as it would from a vending machine or fast-food stand. So ThermoPal pays for itself in just a few weeks … and brings big savings over the long, hot summer.

We know you’ll be delighted with ThermoPal for years to come. If not, just send the lid back in the mail for a full refund—no questions asked.

To order ThermoPal, clip and mail the reply coupon. Or visit www.thermopal.com/offer. But hurry—supplies are limited, and we usually sell out by the middle of spring.

COUPON:

□ YES, I want to keep cool. Please send me ___ ThermoPals at $8.95 each plus $1.00 each for shipping and handling. My check is enclosed. If not satisfied, I’ll send back the top of the thermos for a full refund of my money.

Name ____________________________________________________

Address City State Zip _____________________________________

Mail coupon to:

ThermoPal





Box XXX





Anytown, USA XXXXX





A CHECKLIST OF ADVERTISING IDEAS


Copywriters don’t sit down with an assignment and say, “I want to do a testimonial ad” or “Let’s make it a how-to ad.” They first study the product, the audience, and the purpose of the advertisement. Then they use the technique that fits the assignment.

Still, it helps to be familiar with the various types of ads that have been successful over the years: how-to, testimonials, before-and-after, and others.

Below is a checklist of many of these categories. When you’re stuck for an idea, a quick review of the list might give you inspiration—you might scan the list and say, “Hey, here’s an approach that works with what I’m selling!” Turn to this checklist not as a crutch but as an aid in producing selling ideas:

QUESTION AD—asks a question in the headline and answers it in the body copy.

QUIZ AD—copy presents a quiz. Reader takes quiz. Her answers determine whether she is a prospect for the product or service being offered.

NEWS AD—announces a new product or something new about an existing product.

DIRECT AD—gives a straightforward presentation of the facts.

INDIRECT AD—has an obscure headline designed to arouse curiosity and entice the reader to read the body copy.

REWARD AD—promises a reward for reading the ad.

COMMAND AD—commands the reader to take action.

PRICE-AND-WHERE-TO-BUY AD—announces a sale. Describes the product, gives the price and discount, and tells where to buy it.

REASON-WHY AD—presents reasons why you should buy the product.

LETTER AD—an ad written in letter form.

BEFORE-AND-AFTER—shows the improvements gained by using the product.

TESTIMONIAL—a user of the product or a celebrity speaks out in favor of the product.

CASE HISTORY—a detailed product success story.

FREE INFORMATION AD—offers free brochure, pamphlet, or other information. Ad concentrates on getting the reader to send for free literature rather than on selling the product directly.

STORY—tells a story involving people and the product.

“NEW WAVE”—relies on far-out graphics to grab attention.

READER IDENTIFICATION—headline is used to select the audience.

INFORMATION AD—ad gives useful information relating to the use of the product in general rather than pushing the product directly.

LOCATION AD—features the product used in an unusual location to highlight its versatility, usefulness, convenience, or ruggedness.

FICTIONAL CHARACTERS—ad centers around a fictional character such as Mr. Whipple or the Green Giant.

FICTIONAL PLACES—ad centers around a fictional place such as Marlboro Country.

CARTOONS AND CARTOON STRIPS.

ADVERTISER IN AD—the advertiser appears in the ad to speak about his own product.

INVENT A WORD—the advertiser invents a word to describe his product or its application. (The term “athlete’s foot” was invented by adman Obie Winters to sell his client’s product, a horse liniment that could also cure ringworm of the foot; Gerard Lambert popularized “halitosis” to sell Listerine.)

COMPARATIVE ADVERTISING—shows how your product stacks up against the competition.

CHALLENGE—challenges the reader to find a better product than yours.

GUARANTEE AD—focuses on the guarantee, not the product.

OFFER AD—focuses on the offer, the sale, and not the product.

DEMONSTRATION—shows how the product works.

PUN—headline attracts attention with clever wordplay. The pun is explained in the copy.

CONTESTS AND SWEEPSTAKES.

TIE-IN WITH CURRENT EVENTS—to add timeliness and urgency to the selling proposition.





WRITING FRACTIONAL DISPLAY ADS


As a copywriter, you will mostly be writing full-page ads in magazines and newspapers. But many mail-order advertisers get better results from half-page ads, usually but not always in a vertical layout to resemble a column of type in the paper.

These are often designed and written as advertorial or native advertising, which means they are designed to look like articles and not advertisements. The logic of this approach is sound, as “editorial” content (articles) get higher readership an