Begin Reading

Table of Contents

About the Author

Copyright Page



Thank you for buying this

St. Martin’s Press ebook.



To receive special offers, bonus content,

and info on new releases and other great reads,

sign up for our newsletters.





Or visit us online at

us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup



For email updates on the author, click here.





The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your personal use only. You may not make this e-book publicly available in any way. Copyright infringement is against the law. If you believe the copy of this e-book you are reading infringes on the author’s copyright, please notify the publisher at: us.macmillanusa.com/piracy.





For David Justiss, Scott Martin, and Brian Croner





Advertise in some shape or other, because it is evident that if a man has a good article for sale, and nobody knows it, it will bring him no return.

—P. T. Barnum, The Art of Getting Money





PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION


In the digital age, readers perceive any book with a copyright date older than the expiration date on the chicken they bought at the supermarket last week as ancient and outmoded.

So when readers pointed out to me that the last revision of The Copywriter’s Handbook, the third edition, had been published more than ten years ago, we knew it was time for a fourth edition.

Whether you already own an earlier edition of this book or are reading The Copywriter’s Handbook for the first time, I think you will find this revised and updated fourth edition interesting and helpful.

While the core of copywriting, human psychology, has not changed in ten centuries, the world is changing at a dizzying pace, and that affects marketing. For instance, we used to say a disgruntled customer would tell ten other people about his dissatisfaction with a merchant. Now, with online reviews and social media, some can and do tell thousands.

Over the past decade, digital marketing has evolved at warp speed and now accounts for half or more of all dollars spent on marketing. With dozens of marketing channels to choose from online and offline, planning marketing strategy today is much more complex than when the first edition of The Copywriter’s Handbook was published more than three decades ago.*

So … what’s new in the fourth edition of The Copywriter’s Handbook that makes it more useful and up-to-date than previous editions?

Well, there are new chapters written expressly for this fourth edition: chapter 12 on landing pages, chapter 14 discussing online ads, chapter 15 on social media, chapter 16 on video content, chapter 17 on content marketing, and chapter 18 on getting copy written. All other chapters have been revised—some with only minor corrections, others with substantial updates. In particular, the guidelines for a number of digital marketing tactics, among them online video, search engine optimization (SEO), online conversion, e-mail marketing, online advertising, social media, and content marketing, are updated to be as current, accurate, and useful as I could possibly make them.





PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


This is a book for everyone who writes, edits, or approves copy—ad agency copywriters, freelancers, ad managers, account executives, creative directors, publicists, entrepreneurs, sales and marketing managers, product and brand managers, Internet marketers, marcom professionals, content writers, and business owners. It is largely a book of rules, tips, techniques, and ideas.

Many big agency copywriters and creative directors will tell you that advertising writers don’t follow rules and that “great” advertising breaks the rules.

Maybe so. But before you can break the rules, you have to know the rules. And the number of rules and restrictions on marketing has multiplied at a prolific rate.

This book is written to give you guidelines and advice that can teach you to write effective copy—that is, copy that gets attention, gets its message across, and convinces the customer to buy the product.

Beginners will learn all the basics they need to know: what copy is, what it can do, and how to write copy that gets results.

For people who have been in the business a few years, The Copywriter’s Handbook serves as a welcome refresher in writing clear, simple, direct copy. And the book contains some new “tricks,” examples, and observations that can help these folks increase the selling power of their copy. Even “old pros” may find some new ideas—or some old ideas that they can use profitably for their own clients.

My approach is to teach through example. Copy excerpts from case histories and sample ads, commercials, mailers, Web pages, e-mails, and brochures illustrate the principles of effective copy. Guidelines are presented as easy-to-follow rules and hints.

Perhaps the copywriters who don’t know the rules do produce great advertising—one time out of one thousand. But the rest of the time they create weak, ineffectual ads—ads that look pretty and read pretty but don’t sell the product. (And the reason they produce bad ads is that they don’t know what makes for a good ad!)

If you master the basics presented in this book, I can’t guarantee that you’ll go on to write “great” advertising or win prestigious advertising awards. But I can be fairly certain that you’ll be writing good, clean, crisp, hardworking copy—copy that gives your customers reasons to dig into their wallets and buy your product … and not someone else’s!

As you read The Copywriter’s Handbook, you’ll discover what you’ve suspected all along—that copywriters aren’t “literary people,” any more than they are coders, data analysts, or graphic designers. Copywriters are salespeople whose job is to convince people to buy products.

But don’t be disappointed. When you begin to write copy that sells, you’ll discover, as I have, that writing words that persuade can be just as challenging—and exciting—as journalism, fiction, or other writing. And it typically pays a lot better, too.

I do have one favor to ask: if you have a copywriting technique that has worked particularly well for you, why not send it to me so I can share it with readers of the next edition? You will receive full credit, of course. I can be reached at:

Robert W. Bly

Copywriter

31 Cheyenne Drive

Montville, NJ 07045

Phone: 973-263-0562

Fax: 973-263-0613

E-mail: rwbly@bly.com

Web site: www.bly.com





A NOTE ABOUT YOU, THE READER


Because this book has a dual audience—ad professionals who create advertising for clients as well as marketing managers who commission the creation of ads—I use “you” to talk with both audiences, and I believe it will be clear which of the two a particular comment is directed at based on the context. Of course, the majority of what is in this book should be useful to both audiences.





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


I’d like to thank the following people and companies for contributing samples of their work or copywriting tips for publication in this book:

Jim Alexander, Alexander Marketing

Brian Croner

Casey Damachek

Mark Ford

Len Kirsch, Kirsch Communications

Wally Shubat, Chuck Blore & Don Richman Incorporated

Lori Haller

Brian Cohen, Technology Solutions

Len Stein, Visibility PR

Sig Rosenblum

Richard Armstrong

Herschell Gordon Lewis

John Tierney, The DOCSI Corporation

Sandra Biermann, Masonry Institute of St. Louis

Perry Marshall, Perry Marshall & Associates

Fred Gleeck

Andrew Linick

Clayton Makepeace

Milt Pierce

Nick Usborne

Caleb O’Dowd

And many others.

I’d also like to thank my editor, Madeline Jones, for her patient and dedicated work on this project; my agent, Dominick Abel, for his usual fine job in finding a home for the book; and Kim Stacey and Penny Hunt, for their valuable editorial and research assistance.





1



AN INTRODUCTION TO COPYWRITING



“A copywriter is a salesperson behind a typewriter.”*

That quote comes from Judith Charles, president of her own retail advertising agency, Judith K. Charles Creative Communication. And it’s the best definition of the word copywriter I’ve ever heard.

The biggest mistake you can make as a copywriter is to judge advertising as laypeople judge it. If you do, you’ll end up as an artist, entertainer, or, worse, a clown—but not a salesperson. And your copy will be wasting your client’s time and money.

Let me explain a bit. When ordinary folks talk about advertising, they talk about the ads or commercials that are the funniest, the most entertaining, or the most unusual or provocative. A prime example is the annual creative TV commercial extravaganza broadcast during the Super Bowl. These are the ads people point to and say, “I really like that!”

But the goal of advertising is not to be liked, to entertain, or to win advertising awards; it is to sell products. The advertiser, if he is smart, doesn’t care whether people like his commercials or are entertained or amused by them. If they are, fine. But commercials are a means to an end, and the end is increased sales—and profits—for the advertiser.

This is a simple and obvious thing, but the majority of copywriters and advertising professionals seem to ignore it. They produce artful ads, stunningly beautiful Web site design, and clever commercials whose artistic quality and creativity may rival the finest feature films. But they sometimes lose sight of their goals—more sales—and the fact that they are “salespeople behind keyboards,” and not literary artists, entertainers, or movie directors.

Being creative by nature, advertising writers naturally like ads that are aesthetically pleasing, as do advertising artists. But just because an ad is pretty to look at and pleasant to read doesn’t necessarily mean it is persuading people to buy the product. Sometimes cheaply produced ads, written simply and directly without a lot of fluff, do the best job of selling.

I’m not saying that all your ads should be “schlock” or that schlock always sells best. I am saying that the look, tone, and image of your advertising should be dictated by the product and your prospects—and not by what is fashionable in the marketing business at the time, or is aesthetically pleasing to some creative people who deliberately shun selling as if it were an unwholesome mental chore to be avoided at all costs.

Some people say (erroneously) that no one reads anymore and we live entirely in a visual age. To that, Carlin Twedt of Ragan Communications replied, “Sure visuals are gaining in popularity, but words are still a communicator’s most precious commodity.”

As a creative person, you naturally want to write clever copy and produce fancy promotions. But as a professional, your obligation to your client or employer is to increase sales and gain new customers at the lowest possible cost. If a banner ad online works better than a full-page magazine ad, use it. If a simple postcard gets more business than a four-color pop-up mailer with a sound chip, use the postcard.

Actually, once you realize that the goal of advertising is selling (and copywriter Luther Brock once defined selling as “placing 100 percent emphasis on how the reader will come out ahead by doing business with you”), you’ll see that there is a creative challenge in writing copy that sells. This “selling challenge” is a bit different from the artistic challenge: instead of creating aesthetically pleasing prose, you have to dig into a product or service, uncover the reasons why consumers would want to buy the product instead of others in its category, and present those sales arguments in copy that is read, understood, and reacted to—copy that makes the arguments so convincingly that the customer can’t help but want to buy the product being advertised.

One of the greatest advantages of digital marketing is that results can be measured quickly and accurately. This makes it difficult for copywriters to defend creativity or humor should the metrics—page views, time spent on page, click-throughs, conversion rates, opt-ins, and sales—underperform other e-mails and Web pages used by that same client.

Of course, Judith Charles and I are not the only copywriters who believe that salesmanship, not entertainment, is the goal of the copywriter. Here are the thoughts of a few other advertising professionals on the subjects of advertising, copywriting, creativity, and selling:

My definition says that an ad or commercial has a purpose other than to entertain. That purpose is to conquer a sale by persuading a logical prospect for your product or service, who is now using or is about to use a competitor’s product or service, to switch to yours. That’s basic, or at least it should be. In order to accomplish that, it seems to me, you have to promise that prospect an advantage that he’s not now getting from his present product or service and it must be of sufficient importance in filling a need to make him switch.

—Hank Seiden, Vice President, Hicks & Greist, New York

For years, a certain segment of the advertising industry has been guilty of spinning ads out of whole cloth; they place a premium on advertising’s appearance, not on the reality of sales. The result: too many ads and commercials that resemble third-rate vaudeville, desperately trying to attract an audience with stale jokes and chorus lines. On its most basic level, [the advertising] profession involves taking a product, studying it, learning what’s unique about it, and then presenting that “uniqueness” so that the consumer is motivated to buy the product.

—Alvin Eicoff, Chairman, A. Eicoff & Company

Those of us who read the criticisms leveled at advertising around the world are constantly struck by the fact that they are not really criticisms of advertising as such, but rather of advertisements which seem to have as a prime objective finding their way into creative directors’ portfolios. Possibly the best starting discipline for any creative man in any country is the knowledge that the average [consumer] does not even know that an advertising agency, creative director, art director, or copywriter even exists. What’s more, she couldn’t care less if they do. She’s interested in buying products, not creative directors.

—Keith Monk, Nestlé, Vevey, Switzerland

Of course, I have never agreed that creativity is the great contribution of the advertising agency, and a look through the pages of the business magazines should dramatize my contention that much advertising suffers from overzealous creativity—aiming for high readership scores rather than for the accomplishment of a specified communications task. Or, worse, creativity for self-satisfaction.

—Howard Sawyer, Vice President, Marsteller, Inc.

When your advertising asks for the order right out front, with a price and a place to buy and with “NOW” included in the copy, that’s hard-sell advertising, and it should invariably be tried before any other kind. Advertising is usually most beautiful when it’s least measurable and least productive.

—Lewis Kornfeld, President, Radio Shack

Viewers are turned off by commercials that try so hard to be funny, which is the present product of so many agencies. The question that comes to mind is, “Why do these people have to have characters acting like imbeciles for thirty seconds or more just to get the product name mentioned once or twice?”

Are they afraid to merely show the product and explain why the viewer should buy it instead of another like product? Possibly the most stupid thing advertisers do is allow their agency to have background music, usually loud, rock-type music, played while the person is trying to explain the features of the product.

Frequently the music is louder than the voice, so the commercial goes down the drain. More and more people are relying on ads for information to help them decide which product to purchase. The entertainment-type ads on TV are ineffective.

—Robert Snodell, “Why TV Spots Fail,” Advertising Age

Humorous ads are troubling because you have to create a link to the product and its benefit. Often, people remember a funny ad but they don’t remember the product.

—Richard Kirshenbaum, Co-Chairman, Kirshenbaum Bond & Partners

Direct marketing … is the only form of accountable advertising. It’s the only kind of advertising you can ever do where you can trace every dollar of sales to every dollar of costs. Major corporations using traditional advertising have no idea which advertising is effective. If you employ direct marketing you can tell exactly what works.

—Ted Nicholas, How to Turn Words into Money (Nicholas Direct, 2004)

Copy cannot create desire for a product. It can only take the hopes, dreams, fears, and desires that already exist in the hearts of millions of people, and focus those already-existing desires onto a particular product. This is the copywriter’s task: not to create this mass desire—but to channel and direct it.

—Eugene Schwartz, Breakthrough Advertising (Boardroom, 2004)

Ads are not written to entertain. When they do, these entertainment seekers are little likely to be the people whom you want. This is one of the greatest advertising faults. Ad writers abandon their parts. They forget they are salesmen and try to be performers. Instead of sales, they seek applause.

—Claude Hopkins, Scientific Advertising (Bell Publishing, 1920)

The advertisements which persuade people to act are written by [copywriters] who have an abiding respect for the intelligence of their readers, and a deep sincerity regarding the merits of the goods they have to sell.

—Bruce Barton, Cofounder, Batten, Barton, Durstine & Osborn (BBDO)

A good advertisement is one which sells the product without drawing attention to itself. It should rivet the reader’s attention on the product. It is the professional duty of the advertising agent to conceal his artifice.

—David Ogilvy, Confessions of an Advertising Man (Atheneum, 1963)

The “literary quality” of an advertisement, per se, is no measure of its greatness; fine writing is not necessarily fine selling copy. Neither is its daring departure from orthodoxy, nor its erudition, nor its imaginative conceits, nor its catchiness.

—James Woolf, Advertising Age

I contend that advertising people are too tolerant of fluff copy, too eager to produce the well-turned phrase to bother with the hard-fought sale.

—Eleanor Pierce, Printer’s Ink



If there are two “camps” in advertising—hard-sell versus creative—then I side with the former. And so do the experts quoted above.

The Copywriter’s Handbook is written to teach you how to write copy that sells. For copy to convince the consumer to buy the product, it must do four things:

Get attention.

Communicate.

Persuade.

Ask for a response.



Chapter 2 shows you how to write copy that gets attention. You’ll learn to use both headlines and pictures as attention-getting tools. (And you’ll learn to make them work together.)

Chapter 3 is a primer on writing to communicate. It provides rules for writing clear, concise, simple copy that gets your message across to the reader both online and offline.

Chapter 4 presents guidelines on persuasive writing. It will teach you to be a salesperson as well as a writer.

Chapter 5 presents step-by-step instructions that can help you prepare effectively for any copywriting assignment.

In chapters 6 through 17, you learn how to apply these copywriting principles to a variety of media both online and offline.

In chapters 18 and 19, we discuss various options for getting your copy written, designed, and produced, including graphics, visuals, and layout.





HAS THE INTERNET CHANGED COPYWRITING FOR BOTH WRITERS AND READERS?


The major event that has taken place since the publication of the first edition of The Copywriter’s Handbook is the rise of the Internet as a marketing medium and channel of commerce.

Many readers of the first edition have asked me, “Are the copywriting techniques The Copywriter’s Handbook teaches still applicable in the Internet era in general, and particularly to writing for the Web?”

The answer is: well, yes and no. The core of persuasion is pretty much the same. What has changed is what today is known as the “sales funnel” or “customer journey.” Or as the great copywriter Gary Halbert astutely observed: “Fundamentals never change but current variations of how to best use those fundamentals are something you must always stay on top of.”1

Undeniably, the Internet has revolutionized marketing because of its speed, accessibility, ease, and low cost: sending an e-mail marketing campaign is faster, easier, and less costly than distributing the same promotional material through the mail or running it as magazine ads or on TV. Facebook ads can directly target the prospects you want to reach through access to consumer ads. Also, you know the preliminary results within minutes of broadcasting your e-mail or your ads going live. In direct mail, it sometimes takes weeks before you know how well you’ve done.





THE THREE KEYS TO WRITING COPY THAT WORKS IN THE DIGITAL AGE


Here are three ways the Internet has affected the manner in which copy is written, evaluated, and tested today:

1—Human emotion. First, good copy used to be primarily driven by an understanding of human emotion. That was the main factor that guided good copywriters to create winning copy.

But today, there are not one but three key factors that influence how you create copy and make it work: human emotion, data, and compliance (fig. 1.1).

Fig. 1.1: Copywriting is based on three factors: human emotion, data, and compliance.



Copywriter Frank Joseph writes, “There’s never been any marketing of any type that is not enhanced by emotion and sincerity.” Tyler Kelley of SLAM! Agency says, “I think we’re going to see the rise of digital marketing professionals who not only understand digital but understand people—how they think, what motivates them, and why they purchase.”2

An important point is that the Internet has not changed human nature, nor does people’s buying psychology change simply because they are reading your message online instead of offline. As Claude Hopkins wrote in his classic book Scientific Advertising (see appendix D):

Human nature is perpetual. In most respects it is the same today as in the time of Caesar. So the principles of psychology are fixed and enduring. You will never need to unlearn what you learn about them.



2—Data analytics. Human emotion remains important, but copywriting is increasingly driven by data as reported by analytics.

A white paper from Signal notes, “Decision-makers can no longer depend on experience, intuition, and secondhand information.… Data … is the single source of truth—the north star guiding marketers in a world where change is the only constant.”3 Or, as Jordan Pritikin from HubSpot puts it, “Great marketers listen to their numbers.”

Of the marketers surveyed by eMarketer, 55 percent said better use of data for more effective audience segmentation and targeting is among their three top priorities.4

You ignore data at your peril, because they show what’s working today. Also, quantitative measurement based on live data and tests trumps subjective opinion every time.

As for data and information used as source material for copywriting projects, there is so much raw data and content on the Web on every subject imaginable, some of my clients send me new links every five minutes for the project I am writing for them.

For decades, I always told clients more is better than less. But now I am rethinking that position. Sometimes there are thousands of articles on the topic. (I just googled “weight loss” and in less than a second was given links to nearly two million pages.) If I gave all two million articles on weight loss a careful reading or even a quick scan, I could not possibly make my copy deadline.

Renowned journalist John McPhee says: “Writing is selection.”5 In an era of Information Overload, selectivity in writing is more important than ever.

Some marketers are so data-driven that they ignore strong emotional copy, which frequently generates higher response rates than the mediocre copy used in so many tests.

They also impose rules, based on their extensive testing of ads in their product category and preferred medium, which are contrary to what experienced copywriters think they know. For instance, one client in a niche industry finds that the optimal length for a half-page newspaper ad headline is 8 to 12 words. Longer or shorter and response drops. This is something I had never heard before writing for them, but their data trump my training, opinions, and instincts.

3—Digital compliance. You must follow the ad guidelines and rules for whatever search engine, social network, Web site, ad network, e-mail service provider, or other digital platform on which you want to run your ad. If you do not, your ad won’t run, and no one will ever see it.

Compliance with these requirements often makes it difficult to create online advertising that says what you want it to say.

For instance, as of this writing, Facebook rejects ads that talk about weight loss with specific promises (e.g., lose 10 pounds in 7 days). So how is one to run an effective weight loss ad there? And in 2018, Google dropped 3.2 billion ads that violated its advertising policies.6

Marketers are finding hacks around these restrictions. For weight loss and other health claims, product benefit ads have widely been replaced by food-based Facebook ads (e.g., “Top Doctors Say to Throw This Vegetable in the Garbage!”).

Smart marketers are increasingly finding honest and clever ways to get their stronger, bolder, more specific ads approved by Facebook and other media controlling compliance.

Still, data and compliance restrict us in ways we didn’t have to deal with back in the day. Copywriter Richard Armstrong sums up the debilitating effects of digital ad requirements #2 and #3 as follows:

“We’ve gone from ‘They Laughed When I Sat Down at the Piano … But When I Started to Play’ to ‘It’s Feasibly Possible that the Correspondence Course Being Sold in this Advertisement May Be of Some Assistance in Helping You Familiarize Yourself with Learning How to Play the Piano If You’re Willing to Put in Many Hours of Study and Practice.’”

Although compliance is important, what constitutes compliance is sometimes open to interpretation. The rule of thumb, though, is this: for each 10 percent closer you get to perfect compliance, your response rates drop by 10 percent. The plain and simple truth is that overly zealous compliance in many cases results in weaker copy.





* * *



ONLINE ADVERTISING COMPLIANCE GUIDELINES

Amazon Advertising Policies

https://advertising.amazon.com/resources/ad-specs/en

Facebook, Instagram, Audience Network

https://www.facebook.com/business/help/223106797811279

Google Advertising Policies

https://support.google.com/adspolicy/answer/6008942?hl=en

Microsoft Advertising

https://about.ads.microsoft.com/en-us/resources/policies



* * *





SOME GOOD NEWS FOR OLD-SCHOOL COPYWRITERS


The good news for you is that the vast body of the copywriting techniques and selling principles you’ve learned throughout your career, including the ones in this book, remain viable and effective.

Well then, has the Internet changed anything for your readers? Yes, plenty—and here are the changes I see:

1. The Internet, computers, video games, and other screen-based electronic media have caused a reduction in the human attention span. Being concise has always been a virtue in writing, but now it is even more important. This does not mean that long copy doesn’t work, that people don’t read anymore (as some erroneously claim), or that all copy should be minimal (some of my video sales letter scripts run to sixty-five hundred words). It does mean you must follow the wise advice of Strunk and White in The Elements of Style and “omit needless words,” keeping your copy clean and concise.

2. Readers are bombarded by more ad messages and information overload than at any time in human history. As Yale librarian Rutherford D. Rogers once said, “We are drowning in information and starving for knowledge.” That means you must strive to make your copy relevant to the reader, understand what keeps him or her up at night, and address that need, desire, want, or fear in your ad.

3. The Internet has made consumers more savvy, training them to shun promotion, better able to spot hype, and become increasingly skeptical. Both in print and on the Web, buyers often prefer educational-type advertising material: advertising that respects their intelligence, does not talk down to them, and conveys useful and practical information they perceive as valuable in solving their problem or making a purchasing decision.

4. Copy that is mostly information rather than sales is today called “content marketing.” Advertising that looks more like an article than a paid ad is called either an advertorial or “native advertising.”

5. Your prospects are busy and are pressed for time. Convenience and speed of delivery are big selling points today for products and services, as is time saving.

6. Marketers now have the option of putting their product information in print material, online, or a combination of the two. “Multichannel marketing campaigns” typically alternate promotions between print and digital.

7. Because print and digital to a large degree have become integrated, the sales funnel and customer journey—the steps marketers take to generate leads and sales, as well as the buying process the customer goes through—are multistep and more sophisticated than they were before the advent of Internet marketing. Chapters 11 through 17 cover these changes in detail.

Here’s good news for copywriters: because of the rapidly growing use of digital marketing and all the new channels it has spawned, copywriting is a critical skill—both online and offline.

Why? Consumers today are better educated and more skeptical. Thanks in part to the Internet, they have easier, faster access to product information and pricing for comparative shopping. There are more products and brands to choose from, and also more advertising messages—commercials, e-mails, banner ads, mailers—competing for our attention.

As a result, our prospects are bombarded by more communications than were previous generations of consumers. There are more than a billion Web sites they can visit, and over eight hundred channels of television they can watch. Not to mention the hundreds of e-mails and even a dozen or so telemarketing calls some of us get each day.

With all of that information competing for the prospect’s attention, you have to work extra hard to make your promotion—whether print or online—stand out and grab the prospect’s attention. And of course that means one thing primarily: strong copy with a message that readers actually care about.

Yes, lists, media, and offers are tremendously important. But you can identify, fairly quickly and easily, those lists and offers that work best for your product. Once you’ve found the right lists, ad networks, and offers, then the only additional leverage you have for boosting response is through—you guessed it—copy.

Writing is critical to success on the Web. As Nick Usborne points out in his book Net Words, “Go to your favorite Web site, strip away the glamour of the design and technology, and you’re left with words—your last, best way to differentiate yourself online.” In marketing, whether on the Internet or the printed page, copy is still king.





HOW ONLINE VIDEO HAS CHANGED COPYWRITING


Platforms including Vimeo and YouTube have flooded the Web with marketing videos ranging from twenty seconds to forty-five minutes or longer.

YouTube is the leading online video platform, with almost five billion videos watched daily, and three hundred hours of new videos uploaded every minute.7,8

Back in the day, marketing videos were burned onto DVDs and sent to prospects by mail, or else shown to prospects by salespeople on their laptops. Some DVDs and video are still used as inserts in direct-mail packages or in video brochures.

There are four basic modes of learning: watching, listening, reading, and doing—the latter also called “experiential learning.” The problem is, it’s difficult to segment your market by their preferred learning mode. Therefore, we produce our content in multiple formats:

Video mp4 files for people who like to watch.

Audio mp3 files for people who prefer to listen.

Books and e-books for readers.

Workshops, training exercises, and other live events for people who learn by doing.



(According to an article in ClickZ [May 1, 2019], 73 percent of people who participate in a brand’s experiential marketing are more likely to purchase the brand involved.)

Chapter 16 shows you how to write both short-form and long-form online videos.





HOW SOCIAL MEDIA HAS CHANGED MARKETING


Social media has changed the Internet in general and online marketing in particular in four important ways.

First, no longer do you need a huge ad budget to communicate your messages to the world. All you need is a free account on one or more of the social media channels and then to start writing posts, though boosted posts and ads are not free. (A “boosted post” means you pay Facebook to distribute your post to more people.)

Second, while some communications between two parties on the Internet are private, whatever you post on Facebook, whether text or photos, is for public consumption. So social media lessens the degree of privacy Internet users have.

Third, social media is more interactive than most other digital channels. Users can comment on other users’ posts at their whim. Also, social networking is at times a contentious medium, with online arguments in lengthy comment threads sometimes getting rude, mean, personal, or ugly. Apparently, people feel comfortable insulting you while hiding behind their keyboard, saying things they would never dare say to you face-to-face.

Fourth, most social media networks sell advertising, which is often their primary source of income. And because the social networks are controlled by their management, they can reject any ad without the need to explain or justify their decision. So rather than a universal medium for free exchange of information, the advertising side of the Web is restrictive and tightly controlled.

Chapter 15 presents guidelines on how marketers should write for and use social media to build brands, generate clicks and conversions, and ultimately sell products.





HOW MULTICHANNEL MARKETING HAS CHANGED COPYWRITING


The major event that has taken place since the publication of the first edition of The Copywriter’s Handbook is the rise of the Internet as a marketing medium and channel for e-commerce.

The problem for marketing managers, brand managers, small business owners, and copywriters is the growing number of marketing channels, planning how to integrate them into a successful campaign, and then creating a sales funnel for maximum results. A “sales funnel” is a planned sequence of communications that takes people from being unfamiliar with you to doing business with you.

For instance, many clients ask their copywriters to boost conversion rates on their Web sites. When the copywriter asks what the current conversion rate is, some clients often don’t know, because they don’t measure. (“Conversion rate” is the percentage of users who land on a Web site or landing page and order a product, download free content, or otherwise respond to the call to action.) But without a metric by which to measure and evaluate results, you have no way of knowing which copy is working best.

The other challenge created by the proliferation of marketing channels is “attribution.” In modern marketing parlance, attribution is knowing which promotion is the original source of the inquiry or order. In a multichannel world, proper attribution can be difficult, with clicks coming in from so many sources, often simultaneously. That’s a problem because the less accurately you can track attribution and ad performance, the less you know about what’s working for you and therefore which promotions you should continue to run versus which ads are bombing and should be cut off.

According to eMarketer, of the more than one thousand marketers surveyed, more than four out of ten identified “integration of marketing tools for greater efficiencies” as a top priority.9





2



WRITING TO GET ATTENTION: THE HEADLINE AND SUBJECT LINE



When you read a magazine, newspaper, or e-newsletter, you ignore most of the ads and look at or click only a few. Yet many of the ads you skip are selling products that may be of interest to you.

The reason you don’t read more ads is simple: there are just too many advertisements competing for your attention. And you don’t have the time—or the inclination—to read them all.

This is why you, as a copywriter, must work hard to get attention for your ad, e-mail, landing page, or podcast. Wherever you turn—the Web, magazines, television, or the e-mail inbox—there are just too many things competing for your reader’s attention.

For example, each year American companies spend about half a trillion dollars on media advertising.1

Even worse, your ad competes with all of the other content that crosses the reader’s desk or screen.

Let’s say you’re writing an ad to sell laboratory equipment to scientists. Your ad will compete with other ads in the scientific journal in which it is published. The scientist probably receives a dozen or more such journals every month. Each is filled with articles and papers he or she should read to keep up-to-date in his field.

And scientists are suffering from massive information overload: 2.5 million scientific articles are published annually2—and the total amount of knowledge in the world doubles every twelve days,3 as incredible at that sounds.

This increased amount of information makes it difficult for any single piece of information to be noticed. Most Americans in urban areas are exposed to more than four thousand ad messages per day.4

Obviously, those ads that don’t do something special to grab the reader’s attention are not noticed and not read. Bob Donath, former editor of Business Marketing, says the successful ad is one that is able to “pop through the clutter.”

Direct-mail advertisers know that a sales letter has only five seconds in which to gain the reader’s attention. If the reader finds nothing of interest after five seconds of scanning the letter, she will toss the letter in the trash. Similarly, an ad or commercial has only a few seconds to capture the prospect’s interest before the prospect turns the page or goes to the refrigerator. The average cold business e-mail (“cold” meaning sent to a rented e-list) has an open rate of between 14 and 23 percent.5

In advertising, getting attention is the job of the headline. “If you can come up with a good headline, you are almost sure to have a good ad,” writes John Caples in his book How to Make Your Advertising Make Money. “But even the greatest writer can’t save an ad with a poor headline.”





HOW HEADLINES GET ATTENTION


In all forms of advertising, the “first impression”—the first thing the reader sees, reads, or hears—can mean the difference between success and failure. If the first impression is boring or irrelevant, the ad will not attract your prospect. If it offers news or helpful information or promises a reward for reading the ad, the first impression will win the reader’s attention. And this is the first step in persuading the reader to buy your product.

What, specifically, is this “first impression”?

In a print advertisement, it is the headline and the visual.

On a Web site, it is the home page headline and copy.

In a radio or TV commercial, it’s the first few seconds of the commercial.

In a direct-mail package, it’s the copy on the outer envelope or the first few sentences in the letter.

In a press release, it’s the lead paragraph.

In a sales brochure or catalog, it’s the front cover.

In a sales presentation, it’s the first few PowerPoint slides.

In an online video, it’s the first twenty seconds of the video.

In an e-mail marketing message, it’s the From line and the Subject line.



No matter how persuasive your body copy or how great your product, your ad cannot sell if it does not attract your customer’s attention. Most advertising experts agree that an attention-getting headline is a key ingredient in a successful advertisement.

Here’s what David Ogilvy, author of Confessions of an Advertising Man, says about headlines:

The headline is the most important element in most advertisements. It is the telegram which decides whether the reader will read the copy.

On average, five times as many people read the headline as read the body copy. When you have written your headline, you have spent eighty cents out of your dollar.

If you haven’t done some selling in your headline, you have wasted 80 percent of your client’s money.



Ogilvy says that putting a new headline on an existing ad has increased the selling power of the ad tenfold. I have experienced similar results. What is it that makes one headline a failure and the other a success?

Many copywriters fall into the trap of believing that clever wordplay, puns, and “cute” copy make for a good headline. But think a minute. When you make a purchase, do you want to be amused by the sales clerk? Or do you want to know that you’re getting quality merchandise at a reasonable price?

The answer is clear. When you shop, you want products that satisfy your needs—and your budget. Good copywriters recognize this fact and put sales appeal—not cute, irrelevant gimmicks and wordplay—in their headlines. When readers browse ad headlines, they want to know: “What’s in it for me?”

The effective headline tells the reader: “Hey, stop a minute! This is something of interest to you!” As mail-order copywriter John Caples explains, “The best headlines appeal to people’s self-interest, or give news.”

Let’s look at a few examples:

• A classic appeal to self-interest is the headline “How to Win Friends and Influence People,” from an ad for the Dale Carnegie book of the same name. The headline promises that you will make friends and be able to persuade others if you read the ad and order the book. The benefit is almost irresistible. Who but a hermit doesn’t want more friends?

• An ad for Kraft Foods appeals to the homemaker with the headline “How to Eat Well for Nickels and Dimes.” If you are interested in good nutrition for your family but must watch your budget carefully, this ad speaks directly to your needs.

• The headline for a Duncan Hines ad hooks us with the question, “Know the Secret to Moister, Richer Cake?” We are promised a reward—the secret to moist cake—in return for reading the copy.

• “Geico can save you 15% on your auto insurance in 15 minutes” offers the most basic and appealing offer: saving time and money.

• “Dollar Shave Club: Shaving and Grooming Made Simple” stresses the main benefit of convenience: razors and other shaving supplies are shipped automatically, eliminating the need to go to the drugstore to purchase them.

Each of these headlines offers a benefit to the consumer, a reward for reading the copy. And each promises to give you specific, helpful information in return for the time you invest in reading the ad and the money you spend to buy the product.





THE FOUR FUNCTIONS OF THE HEADLINE


Headlines do more than get attention. The Dale Carnegie headline, for example, lures you into the body copy of the ad by promising useful information. The Duncan Hines ad also gets you interested in reading more. And it selects a specific type of reader—those people who are interested in baking cakes.

Your headline can perform four different tasks:

Get attention.

Select the audience.

Deliver a complete message.

Draw the reader into the body copy.



Let’s take a look at how headlines perform each of these jobs.





1. Getting Attention


We’ve already seen how headlines get attention by appealing to the reader’s self-interest. Here are a few more examples of this type of headline:

“Give Your Kids a Fighting Chance”

Crest



“Why Swelter Through Another Hot Summer?”

GE air conditioners



“For Deep-Clean, Oil-Free Skin, Noxzema Has the Solution”

Noxzema moisturizer



Another effective attention-getting gambit is to give the reader news. Headlines that give news often use words such as new, discover, introducing, announcing, now, it’s here, at last, and just arrived.

“New Sensational Video Can Give You Thin Thighs Starting Now!”

Exercise



“Discover Our New Rich-Roasted Taste”

Decaffeinated coffee



If you can legitimately use the word free in your headline, do so. Free is one of the most powerful words in the copywriter’s vocabulary. Everybody wants to get something for free.

Other powerful attention-getting words include how to, why, you, sale, quick, easy, bargain, last chance, guarantee, results, proven, and save. Do not avoid these words because other copywriters use them with such frequency. Other copywriters use these words because they work. You should, too. Grade your performance as a copywriter on sales generated by your copy, not on originality.

Headlines that offer the reader useful information are also attention getters. The information promised in the headline can be given in the copy or in a free booklet the reader can send for. Some examples:

“Free New Report on 67 Emerging Growth Stocks”

Merrill Lynch



“Three Easy Steps to Fine Wood Finishing”

Minwax Wood Finish



“How to Bake Beans”

Van Camp’s



Many advertisers try to get attention with headlines and gimmicks that don’t promise the reader a benefit or are not related to the product in any way. One industrial manufacturer features a photo of a scantily clad woman in his ads, with an offer to send a reprint of the photo to readers who clip the coupon and write in for a brochure on the manufacturer’s equipment. It bombed.

Does this type of gambit get attention? Yes, but not attention that leads to a sale or to real interest in the product. Attention getting for attention getting’s sake attracts a lot of curious bystanders but precious few serious customers.

When you write a headline, get attention by picking out an important customer benefit or concern and presenting it in a clear, bold, dramatic fashion. Avoid headlines and concepts that are cute, clever, and titillating but irrelevant. They may generate some hoopla, but they do not sell.





2. Selecting the Audience


If you are selling life insurance to people over sixty-five, there is no point in writing an ad that generates inquiries from young families. In the same way, an ad for a $95,000 sports car should imply, “This is for rich folks only!” You don’t want to waste time answering inquiries from people who cannot afford the product.

The headline can select the right audience for your ad and screen out those readers who are not potential customers. A good headline for a life insurance ad might read, “To Men and Women over 65 Who Need Affordable Life Insurance Coverage.”

Here are a few more headlines that do a good job of selecting the right audience for the product:

“A Message to All Charter Security Life Policyholders of Single Premium Deferred Annuities”

Charter Security life insurance



“Is Your Electric Bill Too High?”

Utility ad



“Can you trust solar heating companies you never heard of who try to sell you solar roof panels over the phone?”

Solar panels





3. Delivering a Complete Message


According to David Ogilvy, four out of five readers will read the headline and skip the rest of the ad. If this is the case, it pays to make a complete statement in your headline.

That way, the ad can do some selling to those 80 percent of readers who read headlines only. Here are a few headlines that deliver complete messages:

“Caught Soon Enough, Early Tooth Decay Can Actually Be Repaired by Colgate!”

“Hitachi Chiller-Heater Cuts Cooling and Heating Costs Up to 50%”

“Allstate—with accident insurance, they guarantee your car insurance rates won’t go up because of an accident.”

Ogilvy recommends that you include the selling promise and the brand name in the headline. Many effective headlines don’t include the product name. But put it in if you suspect most of your prospects won’t bother to read the copy underneath. For instance, having the product name in the headline or subhead in a half-page newspaper ad for health offers typically boosts response.





4. Drawing the Reader into the Body Copy


Certain product categories—liquor, soft drinks, and fashion, for example—can be sold with an attractive photo, a powerful headline, and a minimum of words.

But many products—automobiles, computers, books, records, home study programs, life insurance, and investments—require that the reader be given a lot of information. That information appears in the body copy, and for the ad to be effective the headline must compel the reader to read this copy.

To draw the reader into the body copy, you must arouse his or her curiosity. You can do this with news, or intrigue, or mystery. You can ask a question or make a provocative statement. You can promise a reward, news, or useful information.

A sales letter offering motivational pamphlets was mailed to business managers. The headline of the letter was “What Do Japanese Managers Have That American Managers Sometimes Lack?” Naturally, American managers wanted to find out about the techniques the Japanese use to run their businesses so effectively.

A classic headline for an ad offering a facial lotion reads: “The $5 Alternative to Costly Plastic Surgery.” The reader is lured into the ad to satisfy her curiosity about what this inexpensive alternative might be. The headline would not have been as successful if it said, “$5 Bottle of Lotion Is an Inexpensive Alternative to Costly Plastic Surgery.”





EIGHT BASIC HEADLINE TYPES


It’s only natural for a creative person to avoid formulas, to strive for originality and new, fresh approaches. To the creative writer, many of the headlines in this chapter might seem to follow rigid formulas: “How to…,” “Three Easy Ways…,” “Introducing the New…” And to an extent, copywriters do follow certain rules, because these formulas have been proven effective in thousands of letters, brochures, ads, e-mails, and online videos.

Remember, as a copywriter, you are not a creative artist; you are a salesperson. Your job is not to create literature; your job is to persuade people to buy the product. As the late John Francis Tighe, a top direct-mail copywriter, pointed out, “We are not in the business of being original. We are in the business of reusing things that work.”

Of course, John didn’t mean that copywriters spend their time deliberately copying the work of other writers. The challenge is to take what works and apply it to your product in a way that is compelling, memorable, and persuasive. Certainly, the best copywriters succeed by breaking the rules. But you have to know the rules before you can break them effectively.

Here, then, are eight time-tested headline categories that have helped sell billions of dollars’ worth of products and services. Study them, use them well, and then go on to create your own breakthroughs in headline writing.





1. Direct Headlines


Direct headlines state the selling proposition directly, with no wordplay, hidden meanings, or puns. “Pure Silk Blouses—30 Percent Off” is a headline that’s about as direct as you can get. Most retailers use newspaper ads with direct headlines to announce sales and bring customers into their stores.





2. Indirect Headlines


The indirect headline makes its point in a roundabout way. It arouses curiosity, and the questions it raises are answered in the body copy.

The headline for an ad for an industrial mixing device reads, “Ten Million to One, We Can Mix It.” At first, this sounds like a wager; the company is betting ten million to one that its mixer can handle your mixing applications. But when you read the copy, you discover that the real significance of “ten million to one” is the mixer’s ability to mix two fluids where one fluid is as much as ten million times thicker than the other. The headline has a double meaning, and you have to read the copy to get the real message.





3. News Headlines


If you have news about your product, announce it in the headline. This news can be the introduction of a new product, an improvement of an existing product (“new, improved Bounty”), or a new application for an old product. Some examples of headlines that contain news:

“Trump’s Tougher Immigration Policies Has Democrats Seething.”

Political



“Finally, a Caribbean Cruise as Good as Its Brochure”

Norwegian Cruise Line



“The Greatest Market Discovery Ever Made”

Commodities trading newsletter



The Norwegian Cruise Line headline, in addition to containing news, has added appeal because it empathizes with the reader’s situation. We’ve all been disappointed by fancy travel brochures that promise better than they deliver. Norwegian gains credibility in our eyes by calling attention to this well-known fact.





4. How-to Headlines


The words how to can be pure magic in advertising headlines, magazine articles, and book titles. There are more than seven thousand books in print with how to in their titles. Many advertising writers claim if you begin with how to, you can’t write a bad headline. They may be right.

How-to headlines offer the promise of solid information, sound advice, and solutions to problems: “How to Turn a Simple Party into a Royal Ball.” “How to Write Better and Faster.” “How to Stop Smoking in 30 Days … Or Your Money Back.” “How to Use Webinars to Drive the Buying Cycle.”

Whenever I’m stuck for a headline, I type “How to” on the page, and what follows those words is always a decent, hardworking headline: good enough to use until something better comes along.





5. Question Headlines


To be effective, the question headline must ask a question that the reader can empathize with or would like to see answered. Some examples:

“What in the World Is Wrong with Me?”

Health magazine



“When an Employee Gets Sick, How Long Does It Take Your Company to Recover?”

Life insurance



“Is Your Pump Costing You More to Operate Than It Should?”

Gorman-Rupp pumps



“Do You Close the Bathroom Door Even When You’re the Only One Home?”

Psychology Today



“Have You Have Any of These Decorating Problems?”

Carpet store



“What Do Japanese Managers Have That American Managers Sometimes Lack?”

Business magazine



Question headlines should always focus on the reader’s self-interest, curiosity, and needs, and not on the advertiser’s. A typical self-serving question headline used by many companies reads something like, “Do You Know What the XYZ Company Is Up to These Days?” The reader’s response is “Who cares?” and turns the page or exits from the Web page.





6. Command Headlines


Command headlines generate sales by telling your prospects what to do. Here are a few command headlines:

“Try Burning This Coupon”

Harshaw Chemical



“Subscribe Today and get a FREE Special Issue Instantly.”

Prevention



“Aim High. Reach for New Horizons.”

U.S. Air Force



Note that the first word in the command headline is a strong verb demanding action on the part of the reader.





7. Reason-Why Headlines


One easy and effective way of writing body copy is to list the sales features of your product in simple 1-2-3 fashion. If you write your ad this way, you can use a reason-why headline to introduce the list.

Examples of reason-why headlines include “Five Reasons Why You Can’t Afford to Miss the MoneyShow Toronto” and “120 to 4,000 Reasons Why You Should Buy Your Fur During the Next Four Days.”

Reason-why headlines need not contain the phrase “reason why.” Other introductory phrases such as “6 ways,” “7 steps,” and “here’s how” can do just as well.





8. Testimonial Headlines


In a testimonial advertisement, your customers do your selling for you. An example of a testimonial are the Publishers Clearinghouse commercials in which past winners tell us how they won big prize money in the sweepstakes. Testimonials work because they offer proof that a business satisfies its customers.

In print ad testimonials, the copy is written as if spoken by the customer, who is usually pictured in the ad. Quotation marks around the headline and the body copy signal the reader that the ad is a testimonial.

When writing testimonial copy, use the customer’s own words as much as possible. Don’t polish his statements; a natural, conversational tone adds believability to the testimonial.





* * *



THE “UNATTRIBUTED TESTIMONIAL”

Even if the words are not a testimonial or quotation, put quotation marks around your headline, if it is strong. Quotation marks catch the reader’s eye and create the impression that the words are a quotation or at least factual, even though they are not attributed to any particular speaker or source.



* * *





38 MODEL HEADLINES FOR YOUR “SWIPE FILE”


A “swipe file” is a collection of promotions that you turn to for reference when creating your own marketing materials. The best way to get ideas for headlines when you are stuck is to keep a swipe file and consult it for inspiration when you sit down to write a new ad or mailing.

The best swipe samples are those that keep running. You know they are being repeated—because they are profitable. Put a red X on any swipe samples you see multiple times, so you can identify winners at a glance.

As a shortcut, here’s a partial collection of such headlines from my vast swipe file, organized by category so as to make clear the approach being used:

1. Ask a question in the headline.

“What Do Japanese Managers Have That American Managers Sometimes Lack?”

2. Tie-in to current events.

“Stay One Step Ahead of the Stock Market Just Like Martha Stewart—But Without Her Legal Liability!”

3. Create a new terminology.

“New ‘Polarized Oil’ Magnetically Adheres to Wear Parts in Machine Tools, Making Them Last Up to 6 Times Longer.”

4. Give news using the words “new,” “introduction,” or “announcing.”

“Announcing a Painless Cut in Defense Spending.”

5. Give the reader a command—tell him to do something.

“Try Burning This Coupon.”

6. Use numbers and statistics.

“Who Ever Heard of 17,000 Blooms from a Single Plant?”

7. Promise the reader useful information.

“How to Avoid the Biggest Mistake You Can Make in Building or Buying a Home.”

8. Highlight your offer.

“You Can Now Subscribe to the Best New Books—Just as You Do to a Magazine.”

9. Tell a story.

“They Laughed When I Sat Down at the Piano, But When I Started to Play…”

10. Make a recommendation.

“The 5 High-Yield Stocks You Must Own NOW.”

11. State a benefit.

“Managing UNIX Data Centers—Once Difficult, Now Easy.”

12. Make a comparison.

“How to Solve Your Emissions Problems—at Half the Energy Cost of Conventional Venturi Scrubbers.”

13. Use words that help the reader visualize.

“Why Some Foods ‘Explode’ in Your Stomach.”

14. Use a testimonial.

“After over Half a Million Miles in the Air Using AVBLEND, We’ve Had No Premature Camshaft Failures.”

15. Offer a free special report, catalog, or booklet.

“New FREE Special Report Reveals Little-Known Strategy Millionaires Use to Keep Wealth in Their Hands—and Out of Uncle Sam’s.”

16. State the selling proposition directly and plainly.

“Surgical Tables Rebuilt—Free Loaners Available.”

17. Arouse reader curiosity.

“The One Internet Stock You MUST Own Now. Hint: It’s NOT What You Think!”

18. Promise to reveal a secret.

“Unlock Wall Street’s Secret Logic.”

19. Be specific.

“At 60 Miles an Hour, the Loudest Noise in This New Rolls-Royce Comes from the Electric Clock.”

20. Target a particular type of reader.

“We’re Looking for People Who Want a Higher-Paying Career.”

21. Add a time element.

“Instant Incorporation While U-Wait.”

22. Stress cost savings, discounts, or value.

“Now You Can Get $2,177 Worth of Expensive Stock Market Newsletters for the Incredibly Low Price of Just $69!”

23. Give the reader good news.

“You’re Never Too Old to Hear Better.”

24. Offer an alternative to other products and services.

“No Time for Yale—Took College at Home Online.”

25. Issue a challenge.

“Will Your Scalp Stand the Fingernail Test?”

26. Stress your guarantee.

“Develop Software Applications Up to 6 Times Faster or Your Money Back.”

27. State the price.

“Link 8 PCs to Your Mainframe—Only $2,395.”

28. Set up a seeming contradiction.

“Profit from ‘Insider Trading’—100% Legal!”

29. Offer an exclusive the reader can’t get elsewhere.

“Earn 500+% Gains with Little-Known ‘Trader’s Secret Weapon.’”

30. Address the reader’s concern.

“Why Most Small Businesses Fail—and What You Can Do About It.”

31. “As Crazy as It Sounds…”

“Crazy as It Sounds, Shares of This Tiny R&D Company, Selling for $2 Today, Could Be Worth as Much as $100 in the Not-Too-Distant Future.”

32. Make a big promise.

“Slice 20 Years Off Your Age!”

33. Show ROI (return on investment) for purchase of your product.

“Hiring the Wrong Person Costs You Three Times Their Annual Salary.”

34. Use a reasons-why headline.

“7 Reasons Why Production Houses Nationwide Prefer Unilux Strobe Lighting When Shooting Important TV Commercials.”

35. Answer important questions about your product or service.

“7 Questions to Ask Before You Hire a Collection Agency … and One Good Answer to Each.”

36. Stress the value of your premiums.

“Yours Free—Order Now and Receive $280 in Free Gifts with Your Paid Subscription.”

37. Help the reader achieve a goal.

“Now You Can Create a Breakthrough Marketing Plan Within the Next 30 Days … for FREE!”

38. Make a seemingly contradictory statement or promise.

“Cool Any Room in Your House Fast—Without Air Conditioning!”

Notice that many of these headline use numbers. Numbers attract the reader’s eye. They should always be written as numerals. If you say “7 reasons why,” prospects want to know the seven reasons and will read the ad to learn them. Also ads and content written as lists, or “listicles,” which look more like editorial content, are easy to write and easy to read.





THE 4 U’S FORMULA FOR WRITING EFFECTIVE HEADLINES


When prospects see your ad, they make a quick decision, usually in a couple of seconds, to read it or turn the page, based largely on the subject line. But given the flood of commercial messages today, how can you convince a busy prospect—in just a few words—that your ad is worthy of attention?

The “4 U’s” copywriting formula—which stands for urgent, unique, ultra-specific, and useful—can help.

Developed by my colleague Mark Ford for writing more powerful headlines, the 4 U’s formula states that strong headlines are:

1. Urgent. Urgency gives the reader a reason to act now instead of later. You can create a sense of urgency in your headline by incorporating a time element. For instance, “Make $100,000 working from home this year” has a greater sense of urgency than “Make $100,000 working from home.” A sense of urgency can also be created with a time-limited special offer, such as a discount or premium if you order by a certain date. Many digital marketers give prospects twenty-four hours or less to take advantage of the offer on their screen. Once the offer period is over, the offer is no longer available. However, I have found consumers find “offer extended” after the expiration deadline credible and acceptable.

2. Unique. The powerful headline either says something new or, if it says something the reader has heard before, says it in a new and fresh way. For example, “Why Japanese women have beautiful skin” was the headline in an e-mail promoting a Japanese bath kit. This is different from the typical “Save 10% on Japanese Bath Kits.”

3. Ultra-specific. Bottom Line, Inc. (formerly Boardroom), a newsletter publisher, is the absolute master of ultra-specific bullets, known as “fascinations,” that tease the reader into reading further and ordering the product. Examples: “What never to eat on an airplane,” “Bills it’s okay to pay late,” and “Best time to file for a tax refund.”

4. Useful. The strong subject line appeals to the reader’s self-interest by offering a benefit. In the headline “An Invitation to Ski & Save,” the benefit is saving money.

When you have written your headline, ask yourself how strong it is in each of the 4 U’s. Use a scale of 1 to 4 (1 = weak, 4 = strong) to rank it in each category.

Rarely will a headline rate a 3 or 4 on all four U’s. But if your headline doesn’t rate a 3 or 4 on at least three of the U’s, it’s probably not as strong as it could be—and can benefit from some rewriting.

A common mistake is to defend a weak headline by pointing to a good response. A better way to think is as follows: if the ad generated a profitable response despite a weak headline, imagine how much more money you could have made by applying the 4 U’s.

A marketer wrote to tell me he had sent out a successful e-mail marketing campaign with the subject line “Free Special Report.” How does this stack up against the 4 U’s?

•  Urgent. There is no urgency or sense of timeliness. On a scale of 1 to 4, with 4 being the highest rating, “Free Special Report” is a 1.

•  Unique. Not every marketer offers a free special report, but a lot of them do. So “Free Special Report” rates only a 2 in terms of uniqueness.

•  Ultra-specific. Could the marketer have been less specific than “Free Special Report”? Yes, he could have just said “Free Bonus Gift.” So we rate “Free Special Report” a 2 instead of a 1.

•  Useful. I suppose the reader is smart enough to figure that the report contains some helpful information. On the other hand, the usefulness is in the specific information contained in the report, which isn’t even hinted at in the headline. And does the recipient, who already has too much to read, really need yet another “free special report”? I rate it a 2. Specifying the topic would help (e.g., “Free special report reveals how to cut training costs up to 90% with e-learning”).



I urge you to go through this exercise with every headline you write. You can also apply the formula to other copy, both online and offline, including e-mail subject lines, direct-mail envelope teasers, letter leads, Web page headlines, subheads, and bullets.

Rate the headline you’ve written in all 4 U’s. Then rewrite it so you can upgrade your rating on at least two and preferably three or four of the categories by at least 1 point. This simple exercise can increase readership and response rates substantially with very little effort.





MORE HEADLINE TIPS


Here are a few points to consider when evaluating headlines:

Does the headline promise a benefit or a reward for reading the ad?

Is the headline clear and direct? Does it get its point across simply and quickly?

Is the headline as specific as it can be? (“Lose 19 Pounds in Three Weeks” is a better headline than “Lose Weight Fast.”)

Does the headline reach out and grab your attention with a strong sales message, dramatically stated in a fresh new way?

Does the headline relate logically to the product? (Avoid “sensationalist” headlines that lure you with ballyhoo and then fail to deliver what they promise.)

Do the headline and visual work together to form a total selling concept?

Does the headline arouse curiosity and lure the reader into the body copy?

Does the headline select the audience?

Is the brand name mentioned in the headline?

Is the advertiser’s name mentioned in the headline?

Avoid blind headlines—the kinds that don’t mean anything unless you read the copy underneath. (“Give It a Hand” is a blind headline used in a recent ad for facial powder.)

Avoid irrelevant wordplay, puns, gimmicks, and other copywriter’s tricks. They may make for amusing advertising, but they do not sell products.

Avoid negatives. (Instead of “Contains No Sodium,” write “100% Sodium-Free.”)





A TECHNIQUE FOR PRODUCING HEADLINES


No two copywriters have identical methods for producing headlines. Some writers spend 90 percent of their writing time coming up with dozens of headlines before they write one word of body copy. Others write the body copy first and extract the headline from this copy. Many copywriters keep swipe files of published ads and use headlines from these ads as inspiration for their own advertisements (I gave you thirty-eight of these from my personal collection earlier).

Copywriters who work at big agencies often rely on art directors to help them develop the concept. But I believe professional copywriters should be able to generate headlines, concepts, and ideas on their own.

Let me tell you how I go about writing a headline. You may find these techniques useful in your own work. First, I ask four questions:

1. Who is my customer?

2. What are the important features of the product?

3. Which of these features do competing products lack?

4. Why will the customer want to buy the product? (What product feature delivers the benefit most important to him?)

When I have my answer to question number 3, I know the key selling proposition I want to feature in the headline. Then it’s simply a matter of stating this benefit in a clear, compelling, interesting fashion, in a way that will make the reader take notice and want to know more about the product.

Sometimes I’ll use a how-to headline. Sometimes I’ll use a question or a reason-why format. Other times I do something that doesn’t fit any of these categories. The point is, I don’t try to force-fit the selling proposition into a formula. I start with a sales message and write headlines that do the best job of illuminating this message.

I usually write six to eight headlines out of which a winner or two emerges. Other copywriters I know write dozens of headlines for a single ad. If writing a lot of headlines works best for you, fine. You can always use some of the strongest discarded headlines as subheads or sentences in your body copy.

When writing a new ad for an existing product, I go through the file of previous ads to see what sales points were covered in those ads. Often, the sales message for my headline will be buried in the body copy of one of the existing ads.

Sometimes when I am unable to produce a lively headline, I make a list of words that relate to the product. I then mix and match the words from this list to form different headlines.

For instance, a client asked me to write an ad on a new type of dental splint used to keep loose teeth in place. The old-type splints were made of stiff strips of metal; the new splint was made of braided wire that could more easily twist to fit the patient’s teeth.

My word list looked something like this:

Twist

Easy



Splint

Technology



Teeth

Invented



New

Revolutionary



Developed

Contour



Dental

Bend



Braided

Dentist



Wire

Introducing



Steel

Flexible



Fit

Loose



Mixing and matching words from this list produced half a dozen good headlines. The one I liked best was “Introducing a New Twist in Splint Technology.” The client liked it and used it in a successful ad.

If you cannot come up with a headline, don’t let it result in writer’s block. Put it aside and begin to write the body copy. As you write the copy and go over your notes, ideas for headlines will pop into your head. Write them down as they come, and go back to them later. Much of this material will be inadequate, but the perfect headline might just be produced this way.





A FINAL WORD ON HEADLINES


The headline is the part of the ad that gets attention. And getting attention is the first step in persuading your reader to buy your product.

Showmanship, clever phrases, and ballyhoo do not, by themselves, make for a good headline. Creating headlines that are wonderfully clever is worthwhile only if the cleverness enhances the selling message and makes it more memorable. Unfortunately, many copywriters engage in creativity for creativity’s sake, and the result is cleverness that obscures the selling message.

If you have to choose between being clever and obscure or simple and straightforward, I advise you to be simple and straightforward. You won’t win any advertising awards. But at least you’ll sell some merchandise.

Jim Alexander, president of Alexander Marketing Services, also believes that headlines should sell. Here are a few of Jim’s thoughts on the subject:

We believe in dramatizing a product’s selling message with flair and excitement. Those are important ingredients of good salesmanship in print. But simple statements and plain-Jane graphics often make powerful ads.

For example, the headline “Handling Sulfuric Acid” might sound dull or uncreative to you. To a chemical engineer who’s forever battling costly corrosion, that simple headline implies volumes. And makes him want to read every word of the problem-solving copy that follows.

So before we let our clients pronounce an ad dull, we first ask them, “Dull to whom?” Dull to you, the advertiser? Or dull to the reader, our potential customer? It’s easy to forget that the real purpose of an ad is to communicate ideas and information about a product. Too many ads are approved because of their entertainment value. That’s a waste of money.



Later in the book, we look at how to write effective headlines for specific digital media including Web sites, e-mail marketing campaigns, and online ads (see chapters 11, 13, and 14).





3



WRITING TO COMMUNICATE



An article published in the Harvard Business Review described experiments designed to measure advertising effectiveness. The experiments showed, not surprisingly, that advertising is most effective when it is easy to understand. In other words, you sell more merchandise when you write clear copy.

In theory, it sounds easy. Advertising deals, for the most part, with simple subjects—clothing, soda, beer, soap, CDs. But in practice, many advertisements don’t communicate as effectively as they could. Here’s an example from an ad that appeared in Modern Bride magazine:

THEY LOVED MY DRESS ON QUIRIUS 3

They smiled politely when Harry showed them our late model telestar, but when he opened the hood of our auto-drive one of their children burst into a shrill laugh and was boxed on his starfish-shaped ears.…



The students in my copywriting seminars call this one “What did she say?” This is an example of a “borrowed interest” ad: The writer didn’t have faith in her ability to make the product interesting, so she hid behind a made-up scenario involving a conversation on the planet Quirius 3. The result? Maximum confusion and minimum communication.

“Borrowed interest” is a major cause of confusing copy. There are others: lengthy sentences, clichés, big words, not getting to the point, a lack of specifics, technical jargon, and poor organization, to name a few.

The following tips will help you write copy that gets its message across to the reader.





11 TIPS FOR WRITING CLEAR COPY


1. Put the Reader First


In his pamphlet “Tips to Put Power in Your Business Writing,” consultant Chuck Custer advises executives to think about their readers when they write a business letter or memo.

“Start writing to people,” says Custer. “It’s okay that you don’t know your reader! Picture someone you do know who’s like your reader. Then write to him.”

Think of the reader. Ask yourself: Will the reader understand what I have written? Does he know the special terminology I have used? Does my copy tell her something important or new or useful? If I were the reader, would this copy persuade me to buy the product?

One technique to help you write for the reader is to address the reader directly as “you” in the copy, just as I am writing to you in this book. Copywriters call this the “you-orientation.” Flip through a magazine, and you’ll see that 90 percent of the ads contain the word you in the body copy.

On here, the column at left shows examples of copy written without regard to the reader’s interests. The right gives revisions that make the copy more you-oriented.

Advertiser-Oriented Copy

You-Oriented Copy



Bank Plan is the state-of-the-art in user-friendly, sophisticated financial software for small-business accounts receivable, accounts payable, and general ledger applications.

Bank Plan can help you balance your books. Manage your cash flow. And keep track of customers who haven’t paid their bills. Best of all, the program is easy to use—no special training is required.



The objective of the daily cash accumulation fund is to seek the maximum current income that is consistent with low capital risk and the maintenance of total liquidity.

The cash fund gives you the maximum return on your investment dollar with the lowest risk. And you can take out as much money as you like—whenever you like.



To cancel an order, return the merchandise to us in its original container. When we have received the book in salable condition, we will inform our Accounting Department that the invoice is canceled.

If you’re not satisfied with the book, simply return it to us and tear up your invoice. You won’t owe us a cent. What could be fairer than that?





2. Carefully Organize Your Selling Points


The managers at a bank in the Midwest wanted to know if people read booklets mailed by the bank. So they included an extra paragraph in a booklet mailed to a hundred customers. This extra paragraph, buried in forty-five hundred words of technical information, offered a free ten-dollar bill to anyone who asked for it.

So how many bank customers requested the free money? None. Obviously, the organization of your material affects how people read it. If the bank had put “FREE $10!” on the brochure cover and on the outside of the mailing envelope, many customers would have responded to the offer.

When you write your copy, you must carefully organize the points you want to make. In an ad, you might have one primary sales message (“This car gets good mileage”) and several secondary messages (“roomy interior,” “low price,” “$500 rebate”).

The headline states the main selling proposition, and the first few paragraphs expand on it. Secondary points are covered later in the body copy. If this copy is lengthy, each secondary point may get a separate heading or number.

The organization of your selling points depends on their relative importance, the amount of information you give the reader, and the type of copy you are writing (letter, ad, commercial, blog post, or news story).

Terry C. Smith, a former communications manager with Westinghouse, has a rule for organizing sales points in speeches and presentations. His rule is: “Tell them what you’re going to tell them. Tell them. And then, tell them what you told them.” The speechwriter first gives an overview of the presentation, covers the important points in sequence, and then gives a brief summary of these points. Listeners, unlike readers, cannot refer to a printed page to remind them of what was said, and these overviews and summaries help your audience learn and remember.

Burton Pincus, a freelance copywriter, developed a unique organizational pattern for the sales letters he writes. Pincus begins with a headline that conveys a promise, shows how the promise is fulfilled, and gives proof that the product is everything the copy says it is. Then he tells the reader how to order the product and explains why the cost of the product is insignificant compared to its value.

Before you create an ad or landing page, write down your sales points. Organize them in a logical, persuasive, clear fashion. And present them in this order when you write your copy.





3. 