copy more effective.

You can enlist the aid of your freelance copywriter, advertising consultant, or ad agency in developing these rules and guidelines. Together you may decide to add new rules or delete those guidelines that serve no real purpose.

Ideally, copy guidelines should be formulated and refined based on analysis of tested data. For instance, one of my clients has found, through extensive testing, that headlines in half-page newspaper ads of 8 to 12 words generate the most orders. He has many other guidelines, also based on tested experience, that he uses to boost his ad response.





19



GETTING YOUR COPY DESIGNED AND PRODUCED





THE ROLE OF THE COPYWRITER IN DESIGN


The copywriter’s job is to come up with selling ideas. Many of the most important of these messages can be expressed primarily with words, though experience shows that a strong photo or drawing with a persuasive caption can improve ad effectiveness.

In the pre-digital era, many copywriters stated that the primary purpose of the layout was to make the copy easy to read. While older boomers (like me) still believe making copy easy to read is an essential component of design, many younger marketers make the graphics, pictures, and videos the center of attention.

The reason is twofold. First, they contend that consumers do not read copy, especially long copy. This erroneous assumption has repeatedly been proven wrong in countless digital and print tests. Or, rather more specifically, casual Web surfers and browsers don’t read long copy, but prospects and buyers do.

Second, they have grown up in a digital, visual age. They subscribe to the old saw “one picture is worth a thousand words.” They do not realize that the ads are stronger when a powerful visual is accompanied by words.

As noted, people who do not read your copy are usually not serious buyers, but rather browsers. Consumers who intend to buy read a lot of copy about the product—and without this detail, do not buy. Exceptions? Of course.

The visual supports, enhances, and explains the ideas in the copy, but the copy usually doesn’t depend on the visual and can stand on its own, even in the digital age. Some concepts are best expressed only by a strong combination of images and pictures. For others, especially those that would benefit from demonstration, video may work best.

There are times when you, as a copywriter, need more than copy to get your ideas across. You may need photos to show the consumer what you are offering and make it desirable (e.g., travel, fashion, jewelry, cars, homes, and many other things that are most clearly communicated with pictures).

To guide both digital and print designers and graphic artists on how the copywriter wants the copy designed, he creates what is known as a copywriter’s rough. As the name implies, this is a simple sketch used to communicate the layout the copywriter envisions, especially the positioning of headlines, subheads, banners, calls to action, videos, photos, and response devices.

I draw my copywriter’s roughs in Microsoft Word, so I can easily insert them into the Word documents containing my copy. I also keep a subdirectory of files on my PC containing copywriter’s roughs I have created for many different projects. Often the copywriter’s rough for one project can be reused as is or with minor modification, saving me time and effort.

Some prospective clients ask, “Do you do the artwork also?” I reply, “I don’t take photographs or do illustrations. If my concept depends on a visual, I’ll either write a description of the visual in the copy or provide a copywriter’s rough.” See figure 19.1 for an example.

Fig. 19.1: Copywriter’s rough layout for full-page magazine ad.



A freelance copywriter submits a copywriter’s rough—typically a crude sketch just to show where the various elements go.

An agency writer turns his copy and copywriter’s rough over to the art director for polishing. A good art director enhances the writer’s visual concept by adding his own ideas and creativity to it.

Some agencies submit two or three versions of the layout so the client can select the one he likes best. To me, this is like having my lawyer say, “Which defense do you think I ought to use?” I believe the agency should select the version it thinks is best and submit this to the client. After all, the client is paying the agency to make judgments in the creative area.

Once the rough is approved, the agency may submit a more polished drawing—the comp—before photos are taken and type is set.

Why do ad agencies go through the process of submitting roughs? Because of the cost of revisions. It is relatively inexpensive to make changes to a rough, especially with almost all art and layout done on computer these days.





ART DIRECTION FOR COPYWRITERS


Agency copywriters know they have staff artists who can put their layout ideas in polished form.

Freelancers don’t. So the client can either hire a freelance graphic artist or rely on the company’s staff graphics team.

There is no need for the freelancer to hire an artist; just let your clients know that you will be providing copywriter’s roughs, not finished comps. If the client demands comps, and if you’re willing to provide this service, you can hire an artist.

In return for supervising the artwork, you may add an extra charge for artwork to your bill. This charge can be based on a percentage of the cost of hiring the artist. Or it can be whatever fee you think is reasonable.

If all this talk of drawing and art has you, as a “pure” writer, a bit worried, stop worrying.

On nine out of ten projects I do not do a copywriter’s rough or any other type of sketch. It’s not necessary: either my concept doesn’t depend on a visual or, if it does, the visual can easily be described in words in the manuscript I submit.

Only one out of ten of my ads or Web pages is so visually complex or dependent upon a visual that I need to sketch it out. And doing the crude sketch never takes more than ten minutes.

The computer has helped with this enormously. Reason: not every promotion needs an original layout. So the layout I draw for one project can often be recycled, as is, or with minor modification for other projects—saving me an enormous amount of time.

As mentioned earlier, I keep all the layouts I do for my various copywriting assignments in a folder on my PC labeled “layouts.” They are all drawn in Microsoft Word, making them easy to incorporate into the Word documents I submit as copy to my clients.

Below is another sample layout from this folder. As you can see, a copywriter’s rough is truly rough—this is a layout for a postcard. The copywriter does not design the finished piece; the layout is to show position of copy elements only.

Fig. 19.2: Copywriter’s rough postcard layout.



Here are a few more of my copywriter’s roughs you may find interesting—even useful.

These are crude drawings, which you can do either using drawing software (e.g., Adobe Illustrator) or with a black marker on a sheet of paper.

Note that there is no attempt to dress them up and make them looked like a finished layout. That’s the graphic designer’s job, and she can do it better than you can. All that your copywriter’s roughs do is show where you think each element should be positioned and the relative size and emphasis of each.

Fig. 19.3: Copywriter’s rough for landing page.



Fig. 19.4: Copywriter’s rough for trifold brochure to fit on a rack or in a #10 envelope.

Trifold Brochure—letter size folded to form 6 panels





* * *



10 TIPS FROM A TOP GRAPHIC DESIGNER

Veteran graphic artist Lori Haller says that by following the tips below, you can easily eliminate the most common graphic design mistakes from your marketing materials:

#1) Copy is KING. ALWAYS. PERIOD.

#2) Readability can make or break the campaign—online, print, always …

#3) Know your reader—deeply.

#4) Use fonts that are easy to read for your core audience. Small fonts are difficult for older audiences, as are column widths that are too wide.

#5) Stay on top of color trends. Your design can look outdated quickly.

#6) You have the ability to force the reader to read where you direct them.

#7) Get into the minds of the audience, into their shoes; become them, think like them, feel their pain, know what keeps them up at night.

#8) Read testimonials about the product, service, or guru …

#9) Order forms and cart pages must be easy to read, simple, and easy to understand. The reader does not want to feel tricked.

#10) Read the copy. Understand it. Get tight as a unit with the writer and make strategic plans together for success. Trust each other; share, bend, learn, and grow together. A solid team has a bigger potential to WIN—ALWAYS.



* * *





MORE DESIGN TIPS FOR COPYWRITERS


Here is a miscellany of graphic arts tips, rules, and techniques that every copywriter should know:

•  First, there’s the magic of the “Basic A” layout for magazine ads (fig. 19.5). This is the simplest, most standard layout: large picture at the top, headline underneath, body copy in two or three columns under the headline, logo and address in the bottom right-hand corner.

•  Basic A is not spectacular, and some art directors consider it “old hat.” But it’s sensible, it draws the reader into the copy, and it’s easy to read.

•  You may want something different. Fine. But at least consider Basic A before going on to a more “creative” design.

Fig. 19.5: Copywriter’s rough for Basic A ad layout.



•  A layout should have a single “focal point” where the eye goes to first. This is usually the visual; it can also be the headline.

•  A layout should pull the eye from headline and visual through the body copy in logical sequence to the signature and logo. Subheads and bullets can help accomplish this.

•  On a Web site, the visitor’s eye goes to the upper right corner of the home page first. So that’s a good location for a prominent call to action (CTA).

•  Setting the headline in big, bold type helps draw attention to it. A powerfully written headline, splashed across a print or Web page in large letters, can be a real stopper.

•  If you want the reader to respond to your ad, use a coupon. The coupon should appear in the lower right-hand corner of the ad; the ad should be run against the outer edge of the right-hand page. If a coupon borders the “gutter”—the fold running down the middle of a magazine or newspaper—people will not tear it out.

•  If you want people to respond to your ad by phoning, set the phone number in large type at the end of the body copy. A toll-free number gets more calls than a pay number—even if you invite the reader to call on your pay number “collect.”

•  If you prefer an online response, include in large bold type the URL of the sales or landing page where the consumer can see and read more about the product, and also buy online.

•  Photos usually make better visuals than drawings. They are more real, more believable, than illustrations.

•  Full-color gets more attention and gives a better impression than black and white. But full-color is much more expensive to produce and to run in print.

•  Online, color adds no cost. But put most of the copy in black type against a white background. Sparingly use red or another color to emphasize a word or phrase.

•  In the hands of a skilled graphic artist, a second color can add to a brochure or ad’s effectiveness. In the hands of an amateur, it can look chintzy and cheap. Be careful when using a second color in your layout.

•  The simpler the layout, the better. Ads, PowerPoint slides, and Web pages with too many elements—small pictures, graphs, tables, charts, sidebars—have a complex look that discourages people from reading the copy. It takes a highly skilled graphic designer to produce a multielement ad that doesn’t look cluttered and ponderous.

•  The most important factor in selecting type is its readability. Type should be clear, easy on the eye, friendly, and inviting. Style is important—the choice of font is one of many elements that contributes to the image conveyed by the ad—but readability comes first. Always.

•  Photos should be sharp, clear, and simple. If you have to choose between using a photo of poor quality or no photo, don’t use a photo. Professional photography once was necessary in advertising. Today many people are capable of producing ad-quality photographs taken with the cameras in their smartphones.

•  The best photos demonstrate a product benefit or make you think, “That looks interesting. I wonder what is going on here?” The latter type of photo has story appeal but doesn’t tell the whole story; it leaves something to the imagination and arouses curiosity so that you will read the body copy to find out what the photo is about.

•  Never do anything to make the copy difficult to read. Type should be set in black against a white background: not a tint, not white on black, not in color. I just saw an ad in which the copy was printed on a tablecloth and shot as a photo! Naturally, it was quite difficult to read.

Some ads and many Web sites, of course, are strongly driven by visuals, but even then, the visuals must complement the copy. One example that ran many years ago was an ad for United Technologies. The headline reads, “If you could punch this hole in a Sikorsky Black Hawk helicopter’s gas tank, it would seal itself. In flight.”

The visual is stark: a black circle five inches in diameter. To make the demonstration more dramatic, the ad is printed as an insert in the magazine on card stock.

The circumference of the black is perforated with a dashed line. Push on the black circle, and it pops out of the page, leaving the hole talked about in the headline.





PARTING THOUGHTS


Here are a few opinions I’ve developed on copywriters, art, and art directors:

Some copywriters try to add to their value in the marketplace by taking on a second skill. There are copywriter-photographers, copywriter–art directors, copywriter-narrators, and copywriter–television producers.

The logic makes sense. By hiring the dual-function copywriter, the client gets two services for the price of one.

In reality, the vast majority of A-level copywriters are those who write copy exclusively. People who do two jobs are usually not very good at either one. I know of only one or two exceptions, if that.

For example, all of the copywriter-photographers I know are mediocre writers and mediocre photographers. The reason may be that a skilled writer is so in demand that he has no time for picture taking.

But whatever the reason, I’ve rarely met a “combination copywriter” who was a truly first-rate writer.

Successful copywriters—at least the ones I know—are good at visualizing their ideas, but their visual concepts and layouts are always simple in design. The reason may be that copywriters don’t have the drawing skills needed to express complex visual concepts on paper. So they stick to layouts they can illustrate with stick figures and squiggly lines.

Art directors, on the other hand, have the ability to do elaborate sketches, and so their layouts tend to be more sophisticated and complex.

A good art director can take a writer’s simple concept and add graphic elements that enhance its selling power.

A clear-thinking copywriter can look at an art director’s layout and see ways to make it cleaner, simpler, easier to read, and easier to respond to.

Designing ads is not the complex, mysterious task some people make it out to be. Laypeople believe, and artists encourage this belief, that there is some arcane formula of color combinations, type styles, photography, illustration, graphic elements, and positioning that creates ads with magical selling power.

Simple layouts are the best layouts. They are easier to conceive and cost much less to produce. And they are often the most effective.

A copywriter friend of mine wrote a small (6½ x 4⅞–inch) black-and-white ad selling a home-study foreign language course. The ad’s layout is undistinguished: all copy except for a small line drawing of the study kit in the bottom right-hand corner. Yet this plain-Jane ad has produced sales of more than $5 million!

Words, not pictures, are the most important way of communicating great ideas. The Bible contains many thousands of words and not a single picture.





APPENDIX A



GLOSSARY OF ADVERTISING TERMS

Account—An advertising agency’s client.

Account executive—An advertising agency employee who serves as the liaison between the agency and the client.

Ad click rate—Sometimes referred to as click-through, this is the percentage of ad views that resulted in an ad click.

Ad clicks—Number of times users click on an ad banner.

Ad views (impressions)—Number of times an ad banner is downloaded and presumably seen by visitors.

Address—A unique identifier for a computer or site online, usually a URL for a Web site or marked with an @ for an e-mail address.

Advertisement—A paid message in which the sponsor is identified.

Advertising manager—A professional employed by an advertiser to coordinate and manage the company’s advertising program.

Affiliate marketing—A system of advertising in which site A agrees to feature buttons from site B, and site A gets a percentage of any sales generated for site B.

Affiliate program—An arrangement in which a company pays you a percentage of the sale for every online customer it gets through a link from your Web site to theirs.

Affinity Marketing—Marketing efforts—including e-mail promotions, banners, or offline media—aimed at consumers on the basis of established buying patterns.

Agora Model—Online business model in which you build a large opt-in e-list, and then drive sales by sending e-mails with product offers to your list.

Agora Publishing—A publisher of consumer newsletters credited with inventing the Agora Model.

Anchor—A word, phrase, or graphic image; in hypertext, it is the object that is highlighted, underlined, or “clickable” that links to another site.

Applet—An application program written in Java that allows viewing of simple animation on Web pages.

Art—A photograph or illustration used in an advertisement.

Art director—An ad agency employee responsible for designing and producing the artwork and layout for advertisements.

ASP (application service provider)—Third-party vendor that develops and hosts Internet and intranet applications for consumers.

AV—Audiovisual. A presentation with words and pictures. The most common digital AV are mp4 video files, which are typically posted on a server.

Avatar—A digital representation of a user in a virtual reality site.

B&W—Black and white.

Bandwidth—How much information (text, images, video, or sound) can be sent through a connection.

Banner ad—A banner is a small boxed message that appears atop commercial Web sites (usually the home page)—or on the first page of an e-zine—and is usually hyperlinked to the advertiser’s site.

BBS (bulletin board system)—Software that enables users to log on to e-mail, Usenet, and chat groups via modem.

Billings—The fees an ad agency charges its clients.

Bleed—An illustration that goes to the edge of the page. Bleed artwork has no borders or margins.

Blue chip—A highly profitable company or product.

Boilerplate—Standard copy used because of legal requirements or company policy.

Book—See portfolio.

Bookmark—An easy way to find your way back to a Web site—just like a bookmark helps you keep your place in a book you are reading.

Bounce—This is what happens when e-mail returns as undeliverable.

Brand—The label by which a product is identified.

Brand manager—A manager employed by an advertiser to take charge of the marketing and advertising of a brand.

Branding—A school of advertising that says, “If the consumer has heard of us, we’ve done our job.”

Broadband—A data-transmission scheme in which multiple signals share the bandwidth.

Broadside—A one-page promotional flyer folded for mailing.

Brochure—A booklet promoting a product or service.

Browser—An application used to view information from the Internet.

Budget—The amount of money the advertiser plans to spend on advertising.

Bulk mailing—The mailing of a large number of identical pieces of third-class mail at a reduced rate.

Bullet—A heavy dot used to separate lines or paragraphs of copy.

Buried ad—An ad surrounded by other ads.

Business-to-business advertising—Advertising of products and services sold by a business to other businesses.

Buttons—Objects that, when clicked once, cause something to happen.

Cache—A storage area for frequently accessed information.

Campaign—A coordinated program of advertising and promotion.

CGI (common gateway interface)—An interface-creation scripting program that allows Web pages to be made on the fly based on information from buttons, checkboxes, text input, and so on.

Chat room—An area online where you can chat with other members in real time.

Click—The opportunity for a visitor to be transferred to a location by clicking on an ad, as recorded by the server.

Clickbait—Copy or content posted on your Web site and stuffed with key words, for the sole purpose of attracting search engines. Google is wise to the practice and often ignores clickbait; it also penalizes you if the exact same content appears word for word on other sites.

ClickFunnel—A platform for creating and managing Web sites that takes visitors through your sales funnel online—a sequence of steps in a marketing campaign with the sole purpose of turning clicks into either leads or direct sales.

Click-through rate (CTR)—The percentage of users who click on a hyperlink (usually in an online ad or e-mail) to reach the Web page to which the link is attached.

Client—A company that uses the services of advertising professionals.

Clio—Advertising-industry awards given for the best television commercials of the year.

Collateral—Printed product information such as brochures, flyers, catalogs, and direct mail.

Considered purchase—A purchase made after careful evaluation of the product.

Consumer—One who buys or uses products and services.

Consumer advertising—Advertising of products sold to the general public.

Consumer products—Goods sold to individuals rather than to business or industry.

Contest—Sales promotion in which the consumer uses his skill to try to win a prize. Some contests require proof of purchase.

Conversion—Getting an online user to take a specific action, typically registering online in exchange for free content or purchasing a product from a Web site.

Cookie—A file on your computer that records information such as where you have been on the World Wide Web. The browser stores this information, which allows a site to remember the browser in future transactions or requests.

Copy—The text of an ad, commercial, or promotion.

Copy/Contact—An ad agency copywriter who works directly with the client instead of through an account executive.

Copywriter—A person who writes copy.

CPC—Cost per click.

CPL—Cost per lead.

CPM—CPM is the cost per thousand for a particular site. A Web site that charges $15,000 per banner and guarantees 600,000 impressions has a CPM of $25 ($15,000 divided by 600).

CPT—Cost per transaction.

CPTM—Cost per targeted thousand impressions.

Creative—Describes activities directly related to the creation of advertising. These include copywriting, photography, illustration, and design.

Creative director—Ad agency employee responsible for supervising the work of copywriters, art directors, and others who produce advertising.

Demographic overlay—Adding demographic data to a prospect or customer list by running it through the computer and matching it against other lists that already contain the data.

Demographics—Statistics describing the characteristics of a segment of the population. These characteristics include age, sex, income, religion, and race.

Direct mail—Unsolicited advertising material delivered by mail.

Direct response—Marketing that seeks to get orders or leads directly and immediately rather than build an image or awareness over a period of time.

Domain Part of the DNS (domain naming system)—Name that specifies details about the host. A domain is the main subdivision of Internet addresses, the last three letters after the final dot, and it tells you what kind of organization you are dealing with. There are six top-level domains widely used in the United States: .com (commercial), .edu (educational), .net (network operations), .gov (U.S. government), .mil (U.S. military), and .org (organization).

Downscale—Consumers on the low end of the social scale in terms of income, education, and status.

Drill down—A term used to express what a surfer does as he or she goes further into a Web site—deeper into the back pages, deeper into data.

E-commerce—Using electronic information technologies on the Internet to allow direct selling and automatic processing of purchases between parties.

E-list—A direct-mail list containing Internet addresses and used to distribute promotional messages over the Internet.

E-mail—An abbreviation for electronic mail, which is a network service that allows users to send and receive messages via computer.

E-zine—A part-promotional, part-informational newsletter or magazine distributed on the Internet.

Editorial—Those portions of a magazine’s or newspaper’s reading matter that are not advertisements, articles, news briefs, fillers, and other material produced by the publication’s editors and writers.

Emoticons—The online means of facial expression and gestures, such as a smiley face: or:).

Eyeballs—The number of people clicking on and viewing a given Web site or page.

FAQ—FAQ is a commonly used abbreviation for “frequently asked questions.”

Farm out—To assign work to an outside vendor rather than handle it in-house.

Feature story—A full-length magazine article.

Fee—The charge made by an agency or advertising professional to the client for services performed.

Firewall—A security barrier placed between an organization’s internal computer network—either its IT system or intranet—and the Internet.

Flame—An intentionally crude or abusive e-mail message.

Floater—Similar to a pop-up or pop-under, except it is not blocked by pop-up blockers because it is part of the Web page or landing page HTML code. The floater is used to capture the visitor’s e-mail address, usually by offering free content.

Forms—The pages in most browsers that accept information in text-entry fields.

Four A’s—American Association of Advertising Agencies, an industry trade association.

Four color—Artwork reproduced in full color.

Fractional ad—An ad that takes less than a full page in a magazine or newspaper.

Freelance—A self-employed copywriter, photographer, artist, media buyer, or other advertising professional.

Frequency—The number of times an ad is delivered to the same browser in a single session or time period. A site needs to use cookies in order to manage ad frequency.

FTP (file transfer protocol)—A protocol that allows the transfer of files from one computer to another. FTP can also be used as a verb.

Full-service agency—An ad agency that offers its clients a full range of advertising services including creative services, media buying, planning, marketing, and research.

General advertising—Advertising that seeks to instill a preference for the product in the consumer’s mind to promote the future sale of the product at a retail outlet or through a distributor or agent. This is the opposite of direct response advertising.

GIF (graphic interchange format)—A common compression format used for transferring graphics files between different computers.

Hack—To illicitly access a Web site to either purloin data, make unauthorized page changes, or shut the site down.

Hit—When a page request is made, all elements or files that comprise the page are recorded as hits on a server’s log file.

Home page—The page designated as the main point of entry of a Web site or the starting point when a browser first connects to the Internet.

Host—A server connected to the Internet (with a unique IP address).

House organ—A company-published newsletter or magazine.

HTML—A coding language used to make hypertext documents for use on the Web.

https (hypertext transfer protocol)—A standard method of publishing information as hypertext in HTML format on the Internet.

https-SSL—https with SSL (secure socket layer) encryption for security.

Hyperlink—This is the clickable link in text graphics on a Web page that takes you to another place on the same page, another page, or a whole other site.

Hypertext—Electronic documents that present information that can be read by following many different directions through links, rather than just read linearly like printed text.

Image—The public’s perception of a firm or product.

Impulse buy—A purchase motivated by chance rather than by plan.

In-house—Anything done internally within a company.

Industrial advertising—Advertising of industrial products and services.

Influencer—Someone who is widely followed on the Web and uses her popularity to influence her readers to buy various products and brands, often in exchange for free products and services from the marketer.

Inquiry—A request for information made by a potential customer responding to an ad or promotion.

Inquiry fulfillment package—Product literature sent in response to an inquiry.

Internet—A collection of approximately 60,000 independent, interconnected networks providing reliable and redundant connectivity between disparate computers and systems by using common transport and data protocols.

Internet domain name—The unique name that identifies an Internet entity.

Interstitial—An interstitial ad is an “intrusive” ad unit that is spontaneously delivered without specifically being requested by a user.

IP address (Internet protocol address)—Every system connected to the Internet has a unique IP address, which consists of a number in the format A, B, C, or D, where each of the four sections is a decimal number from 0 to 255.

ISP (Internet service provider)—A business that provides access to the Internet.

Java—An object-oriented programming language created by Sun Microsystems that supports enhanced features such as animation or real-time updating of information.

Jingle—Music and lyrics used in a commercial.

JPEG (joint photographic experts group)—A newer graphics format that displays photographs and graphic images with millions of colors, compresses well, and is easy to download.

Keyword—A word or phrase used to focus on online research.

Landing page—Any Web page designed to generate conversion or other direct action, as opposed to a page that just provides content or links to more content.

Layout—A drawing used to get a rough idea of how a finished ad, poster, or brochure will look.

Lead—See sales lead.

Lettershop—A firm that reproduces sales letters and other advertising literature.

Lift letter—A second letter included in a direct-mail package; the lift letter is designed to increase response to the mailing. Also known as a publisher’s letter because it is primarily used in mailings that solicit magazine subscriptions.

Link—An electronic connection between two Web sites.

List broker—A person who rents mailing lists.

Listserver—A program that automatically sends e-mail to a list of subscribers. It is the mechanism that is used to keep new groups informed.

Load—Usually used with upload or download, it means to transfer files or software—to “load”—from one computer or server to another computer or server.

Log or log file—File that keeps track of network connections.

Login—The identification or name used to access—log in to—a computer, network, or site.

Logo—The name of a company set in specially designed lettering.

Lottery—In a lottery, winners are chosen by chance and must make a purchase to enter.

Madison Avenue—The mainstream of the New York City advertising community. Madison Avenue is a street that runs along the East Side of Manhattan; used in the advertising sense, the term “Madison Avenue” refers to agencies located in the heart of midtown Manhattan.

Mailing list—An online mailing list is an automatically distributed e-mail message on a particular topic going to certain individuals.

Market—A portion of the population representing potential and current customers for a product or service.

Marketing—The activities companies perform to produce, distribute, promote, and sell products and services to their customers.

Marketing communications—Communications used in marketing a product or service. “Marketing communications” includes advertising, public relations, and sales promotion.

Mass advertising—Advertising aimed at the general public.

Media—Any method of communication that brings information, entertainment, and advertising to the public or the business community.

Merchandising—Activities designed to promote retail sales.

Meta tags—Used to identify the creator of a Web page, what HTML specs the page follows, and the keywords and description of the page. Model of selling information products online.

Modem—A contraction for “modulation/demodulation,” it is the device that converts a digital bit stream into an analog signal (and back again) so computers can communicate across phone lines.

Name squeeze page—A landing page, usually brief, designed to capture the user’s e-mail address, either in exchange for an offer of free content or as a condition of allowing the reader access to copy on a landing page or other Web page. (Also known as a squeeze page.)

Native advertising—Advertising designed to look like editorial content.

Netiquette (Internet etiquette)—The rules of how to behave on the Internet.

Netizen—An active Internet user.

Newbie—A term to describe anyone new to an area, whether it be a particular forum online or the Internet.

Newsgroup—A discussion group on Usenet devoted to talking about a specific topic.

On speculation (“on spec”)—Work that the client will pay for only if he likes it and uses it.

One-Time Offer (OTO)—A product offer you make to people, usually those who have just subscribed to your e-zine or joined your e-list, that they will see once and not again.

Opt in—To agree to receive promotional e-mails when registering on a particular Web site from the site owner and other companies to whom he or she may rent your e-mail address.

Opt out—To request that an e-list owner take your name off the list or at least make sure you are not sent any promotional e-mails.

Order page—When you click the Order Now button on a landing page, you are taken to an order page describing the offer and allowing you to place your order online.

Package goods—Products wrapped or packaged by the manufacturer. Package goods are low in cost and typically sold on store shelves.

Page—All Web sites are a collection of electronic “pages” formatted in HTML.

Page views—Number of times users request a page.

Pay-per-click—An advertising pricing model in which advertisers pay agencies based on how many consumers clicked on a promotion.

PDF files—Adobe’s portable document format (pdf) is a translation format used primarily for distributing files across a network or on a Web site. Files with a .pdf extension have been created in another application and then translated into .pdf files so they can be viewed by anyone, regardless of platform.

Per diem—Fees charged by the day.

PI—Per inquiry advertising. Advertising for which the publisher or broadcast station is paid according to the number of inquiries produced by the ad or commercial.

Pop-over—A page that pops up on the screen when you visit a Web site or landing page, the purpose of which is to capture the e-mail address of the visitor, usually by offering free content.

Pop-under—A page that pops up on the screen when you attempt to leave a landing page or Web site without placing an order, the purpose of which is to capture the e-mail address of the visitor, usually by offering free content.

Portfolio—A presentation folder containing samples of your work. Shown to prospective employers when you are interviewing for a job.

Premium—Gift offered to potential customers as motivation for buying a product.

Press release—Written news information mailed to the press.

Product manager—A manager employed by an advertiser to supervise the marketing and advertising of a product or product line.

Promotion—Activities other than advertising that are used to encourage the purchase of a product or service.

Prospect—A person with the money, authority, and desire to buy a product or service; a potential customer.

Psychographics—Statistics relating to the personalities, attitudes, and lifestyles of various groups of people.

Pub-set—Ads designed and typeset by the publication in which they will appear.

Public relations—The activity of influencing the press so that they print (and broadcast) stories that promote a favorable image of a company and its products.

Publisher’s letter—See lift letter.

Puffery—Exaggerated product claims made by an advertiser.

Pull—The response generated by an advertisement.

Red Book—Refers to both The Standard Directory of Advertising Agencies and The Standard Directory of Advertisers.

Reel—A reel of film or videotape containing sample commercials written by the copywriter.

Reply card—A self-addressed postcard sent with advertising material to encourage the prospect to respond.

Research—Surveys, interviews, and studies designed to show an advertiser how the public perceives his product and company or how they react to the advertiser’s ads and commercials.

Sales funnel—A sequence of steps in a marketing campaign with the sole purpose of turning clicks into either leads or direct sales.

Sales lead—An inquiry from a qualified prospect.

Sales promotion—A temporary marketing effort designed to generate short-term interest in the purchase of a product. Coupons, sales, discounts, premiums, sweepstakes, and contests are all examples of sales promotion.

Space—The portion of a magazine or newspaper devoted to advertisements.

Special report—Free content offered as an incentive for the visitor to take action, typically either placing an order or giving you his e-mail address.

Split run test—Two versions of an ad are run in different copies of a publication to test the effectiveness of one version against the other.

Squeeze page—See name squeeze page.

Storyboard—Rough series of illustrations showing what a finished TV commercial will look like.

Sweepstakes—A sales promotion in which prizes are awarded by chance and the consumer does not have to make a purchase to enter.

Teaser—Copy printed on the outside envelope of a direct-mail package.

Trade advertising—Advertising aimed at wholesalers, distributors, sales reps, agents, and retailers rather than consumers.

Transaction page—An order page.

Two color—An ad or sales brochure printed in two colors, usually black and a second color such as blue, red, or yellow.

Type—Text set in lettering that can be reproduced by a printer.

Universe—The total number of people who are prospects for your product.

Upscale—Prospects at the upper end of the social scale in terms of income, education, and status.

Vertical publication—Magazine intended for a narrow group of special-interest readers.

Wire frame—A rough layout or diagram showing how a Web site home page or other pages are to be laid out; i.e., where the page elements such as headline, copy, CTA buttons, videos, and graphics should be placed on the page.





APPENDIX B



PERIODICALS

Advertising Age

685 Third Avenue

New York, NY 10017-4036

Tel: 212-210-0100

www.adage.com

Adweek

261 Madison Avenue, 8th Floor

New York, NY 10016

Tel: 212-493-4262 or 844-674-8161

www.adweek.com

Offers readers a blend of advertising news, features, how-to articles, insights, and columns.

B-to-B

Now published as part of Advertising Age

https://adage.com/section/btob/976

Chief Marketer

https://www.chiefmarketer.com

Direct Marketing

228 Park Avenue

Suite #88658

New York, NY 10003

Tel: 646-741-4771

www.dmcny.org

DM News

156 Fifth Avenue

New York, NY 10010

Tel: 800-538-5544

Fax: 212-925-8752

www.dmnews.com

PublicRelations Journal

120 Wall Street, 21st Floor

New York, NY 10005-4024

Tel: 212-460-1400

www.prsa.org

Sales and Marketing Management

Mach1 Business Media

P.O. Box 247

27020 Noble Road

Excelsior, MN 55331

Tel: 952-401-1283

Target Marketing

11049 Lakeridge Parkway

Ashland, VA 23005

Tel: 888-780-8300

https://www.targetmarketingmag.com/





ONLINE NEWSLETTERS


Ben Settle Daily Email

Regardless of whether you buy in to Ben’s hard-hitting and unorthodox view of marketing, just reading his daily e-mail will make you a better e-mail writer.

www.bensettle.com

Bencivenga’s Bullets

www.bencivengabullets.com

Master copywriter Gary Bencivenga’s can’t-miss e-zine based on his decades of tested results.

Business Made Simple Daily

Cindy Rayfield’s daily video business tip.

https://www.businessmadesimple.com/daily/

The Copywriter’s Roundtable

http://copywritersroundtable.com/

John Forde’s superb e-newsletter on copywriting.

The Direct Response Letter

www.bly.com

My monthly e-newsletter on copywriting and direct marketing.

Excess Voice

https://nickusborne.com/newsletter/

Nick Usborne’s e-newsletter on online copywriting. Informative and great fun.

Marketing Minute

www.yudkin.com/markmin.htm

Weekly marketing tip from consultant Marcia Yudkin.

Paul Hartunian’s Million-Dollar Publicity Strategies

http://www.hartunian.com/

Great marketing e-newsletter focusing on publicity.

The Success Margin

www.tednicholas.com

Ted Nicholas’s must-read marketing e-zine.

Total Annarchy

https://annhandley.com/newsletter/

Ann Handley’s marketing e-newsletter.





APPENDIX C



WEB SITES AND BLOGS

The Advertising Show

http://theadvertisingshow.com/

Radio show on marketing.

American Writers and Artists Inc. (AWAI)

www.awaionline.com

Home-study courses and conferences on copywriting.

Copywriting Genius: The Master Collection

www.monthlycopywritinggenius.com

Regular reviews of winning promotions and interviews with the copywriters who wrote them.

Happy Earner

www.happyearner.com

Tom Woods on Internet marketing (and politics).

The Small Business Advocate

www.smallbusinessadvocate.com

Radio show and Web site dedicated to small business.

Warrior Forum

https://www.warriorforum.com/

An active online forum where copywriters and marketers discuss and debate all things marketing.





APPENDIX D



BOOKS

How to Write a Good Advertisement by Vic Schwab (Wilshire Book Company, 1962).

A commonsense course in how to write advertising copy that gets people to buy your product or service, written by a plain-speaking veteran mail-order copywriter in 1962.

My First 50 Years in Advertising by Max Sackheim (Prentice Hall, 1982).

Another plain-speaking, commonsense guide that stresses salesmanship over creativity, and results over awards. The author was one of the founders of the Book of the Month Club.

The Robert Collier Letter Book by Robert Collier (Robert Collier Publications, 1937).

How to write sales letters with numerous examples of classic mail-order letters.

Reality in Advertising by Rosser Reeves (Alfred A. Knopf, 1961).

The book in which Reeves introduced the now-famous concept of the USP (Unique Selling Proposition).

Breakthrough Advertising by Eugene Schwartz (Bottom Line Books, 2004).

A copywriting guide by one of the greatest direct-response copywriters of the twentieth century.

How to Write Advertising That Sells by Clyde Bedell (McGraw-Hill, 1952).

An in-depth guide to persuasive copywriting by an acknowledged twentieth-century master of the craft.

Tested Advertising Methods, 5th ed., by John Caples, revised by Fred Hahn (Prentice Hall, 1997).

An updated edition of John Caples’s classic book on the principles of persuasion.

The 100 Greatest Advertisements: Who Wrote Them and What They Did by Julian Watkins (Dover, 1959).

A collection of one hundred enormously successful print ads with an analysis of what made each perform so well.

Confessions of an Advertising Man by David Ogilvy (Atheneum, 1988).

Charming autobiography of legendary adman David Ogilvy, packed with useful advice on how to create effective advertising.

Scientific Advertising by Claude Hopkins (Bell Publishing, 1920).

A book on the philosophy that advertising’s purpose is to sell, not entertain or win creative awards—and how to apply this philosophy to create winning ads.

Method Marketing by Denny Hatch (Bonus Books, 1999).

How to write successful direct-response copy by putting yourself in the customer’s shoes. Packed with case histories of modern direct-response success stories, including Bill Bonner of Agora Publishing and Martin Edelston of Boardroom.

Advertising Secrets of the Written Word by Joseph Sugarman (DelStar, 1998).

How to write successful advertising copy by a modern master of the space ad.





APPENDIX E



ORGANIZATIONS

American Writers and Artists Inc. (AWAI)

www.awaionline.com

Copywriting training.

Business Marketing Association

www.marketing.org

Association for business-to-business marketers.

Content Marketing Institute

https://contentmarketinginstitute.com/

Copywriters Council of America

https://www.linkedin.com/in/drandrewlinick

Data and Marketing Association

www.the-dma.org

Social Media Examiner

https://www.socialmediaexaminer.com/

Specialized Information Publishers Association

http://www.siia.net/Divisions/SIPA-Specialized-Information-Publishers-Association





NOTES





CHAPTER 1


1  The Gary Halbert Letter, undated.



2  PR Daily, April 11, 2019.



3  “From Digital-First to Data-First: 2019 Marketing Predictions.” Signal white paper, p. 2.



4  “Awash in Data,” eMarketer Daily, April 12, 2019.



5  http://www.writingfromtheheart.net/writing-advice-from-john-mcphee/.



6  IAB Smart Brief, March 15, 2019.



7  Ibid.



8  https://merchdope.com/youtube-stats/.



9  eMarketer, April 12, 2019, p. 2.





CHAPTER 2


1  https://www.statista.com/statistics/273288/advertising-spending-worldwide/.



2  http://blog.cdnsciencepub.com/21st-century-science-overload/.



3  https://gowithfloat.com/2018/01/rapid-doubling-knowledge-drives-change-learn/.



4  https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbesagencycouncil/2017/08/25/finding-brand-success-in-the-digital-world/#2765ac66626e.



5  https://www.propellercrm.com/blog/cold-email-statistics.





CHAPTER 4


1  https://www.thedailymeal.com/eat/has-mcdonald-s-really-sold-billions-and-billions-burgers.



2  “The Writer’s Life,” AWAI, July 12, 2019.



3  Dr. Ralph Ryback, “From Baby Boomers to Generation Z,” Psychology Today, February 22, 2016.



4  https://www.marketingteacher.com/the-six-living-generations-in-america/.



5  FourHooks, a Digital consultancy agency, The Generation Guide—Millennials, Gen X, Y, Z and Baby Boomers, April 26, 2015, http://fourhooks.com/marketing/the-generation-guide-millennials-gen-x-y-z-and-baby-boomers-art5910718593/.





CHAPTER 5


1  http://credibility.stanford.edu/pdf/Stanford-MakovskyWebCredStudy2002-prelim.pdf.



2  https://mason.gmu.edu/~montecin/web-eval-sites.htm.



3  Ibid.





CHAPTER 6


1  https://www.marketingcharts.com/featured-104785.



2  https://www.adweek.com/digital/iab-study-says-26-desktop-users-turn-ad-blockers-172665/.





CHAPTER 7


1  https://www.themailshark.com/resources/articles/is-direct-mail-dead/.



2  https://www.datatargetingsolutions.com/blog/2018/11/16/20-direct-mail-statistics-for-2019.



3  Talon Newsletter, July 2019, p. 1.



4  Robert Bly, The Direct Mail Revolution (Irvine, CA: Entrepreneur Press, 2019), p. 8.





CHAPTER 12


1  Daniela McVicker, PR Daily, “10 Mistakes That Will Doom a Startup’s First Marketing Campaign,” May 7, 2019.



2  Mequoda Landing Page Scorecard, Mequoda Library, Robert Bly, consulting editor.





CHAPTER 17


1  Content Marketing Institute, August 26, 2017.



2  The Splendid Table, an American Public Media (a.k.a. NPR) talk program: “Spaghetti à la Campbell,” http://www.splendidtable.org/recipes/spaghetti-la-campbell.



3  David Meerman Scott, Cashing In with Content (Medford, NJ: Information Today, 2005), p. 8.



4  https://www.google.com/search?ei=rTnsXPmKLpCxgge3jobABA&q=what+percentage+of+people+have+internat+access+in+2019&oq=what+percentage+of+people+have+internat+access+in+2019&gs_l=psy-ab.3 … 40570.43093.45216 … 0.0.0.230.1019.1j6j1.… 0.… 1.gws-wiz.… 0i71j0i22i30.z7uCJHXxcyY.



5  https://techjury.net/stats-about/blogging/.



6  https://www.ragan.com/study-the-perfect-blog-post-length-and-how-long-it-should-take-to-write-2/.





CHAPTER 18


1  https://www.prdaily.com/why-and-how-you-should-engage-your-gig-workers/?utm_source=RDH&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=RDH+(2019-06-03)&utm_content=article+title&utm_term=3.



2  https://www.popsci.com/article/science/bot-has-written-more-wikipedia-articles-anybody.



3  https://www.targetmarketingmag.com/article/can-a-computer-write-better-copy-than-you/all/.





INDEX


The index that appeared in the print version of this title does not match the pages in your e-book. Please use the search function on your e-reading device to search for terms of interest. For your reference, the terms that appear in the print index are listed below.

ACCA (awareness, comprehension, conviction, action)

ad agencies

AdEspresso

advertiser in ads

Advertising Age

affiliate marketing

Agora model

Ahrend, Herb

AIDA (attention, interest, desire, action)

AI software

Alexander, Jim

Alibaba

Allstate

Amazon.com

American Bar Association

American Express

American Family publishers

American Speaker

animation

annual reports

AOL

Apple

Apprentice, The (TV show)

approving copy. See copy, reviewing and approving

Armstrong, Richard

art direction for copywriters

art directors, parting thoughts for

Associated Press

attribution

audience

asking questions about

for brochures

copy length and

direct mail

e-zines

selection of

for speeches

Avis



baby boomers

backgrounders

bait pieces

banner ads

design and content

page position

size

Barton, Bruce

Basic A layout

BDF formula

before-and-after ads

beliefs

benefits of a product

Benun, Ilise

Berdis, Bert

Bernstein, Sid

Bing

blacklists/whitelists

Blackmer Pump

Blade Runner

Blue Nile

blogs

Bly, Amy

bly.com

Boardroom Books

body copy

believable

drawing reader into

information in

interesting to read

for print ads

“borrowed interest”

Breakthrough Advertising (Schwartz)

broadsides

brochures

audience for

buying process and

call for action

catalogs compared to

copywriter’s rough for trifold

corporate

credibility and

as direct mail

front cover

getting straight to point of

information in

as leave-behinds

obvious items

organized selling points

as point-of-sale literature

product

respond to inquiries

as sales tool

service

short, easy-to-read sections

size and shape

as stand-alone or supported by other materials

as time-saving device

tips on writing

types of

uses for

visuals for

worth keeping

Brock, Luther

B2B marketing

B2C marketing

Budweiser

bullets

Burger King

Businessweek



California Milk Advisory Board

call to action (CTA)

Caltrate 600

Campbell’s soups

Campiti, David

Caples, John

Carnegie, Dale

carousel format

cartoons

case histories

case history ads

case studies

study format

subjects of

trust and believability

catalogs

bestselling items

brochures compared to

discounted items

headlines

key product facts

letter from the manufacturer

order form

sales-stimulating techniques

Century

challenge ads

Chaplin, Charlie

Charles, Judith

Charter Security life insurance

checklist

of advertising ideas

communication

of “copy motivators”

for creative thinking

for newsletters

circulars

classified ads

Cleese, John

ClickFunnel Web site

client-written copy

Coca-Cola

Colgate

Colonial Life

Columbia Journalism Review

command ads

command headlines

communication

“borrowed interest” and

checklist

concise

friendly, conversational style

organized selling points

print vs. Web writing

reader first

sexist language, avoiding

short sections

short sentences

simple words

specific information

straight to the point

stylistic techniques

technical jargon, avoiding

tips for writing clear copy

comparative ads

compliance, digital

Confessions of an Advertising Man (Ogilvy)

conjunctions, beginning sentence with

content filters

content marketing

blogs

case studies

common mistakes

crediting sources

easy way out

formats

history of

lead market

mediocre writing and research

misunderstood subject matter

white papers

contests

continuing characters

conversational tone

conversion. See online conversion

Coors

copy, getting written. See getting your copy written

copy, reviewing and approving

civility and

compliance and

guidelines for copy review

let writers write

levels of approval

opinion polls and

read copy as customer

specificity

copy formulas

copy length

audience and

emotion and

familiarity and

grid to determine

importance and

involvement and

price and

products and

purpose and

copy platform

copywriter’s rough

“core complex”

co-registration

corporate advertising

corporate brochures

Cortés, Hernán

cost per click (CPC)

Crest

Custer, Charles

customer, know your



Danzig, Fred

data analytics

Data and Marketing Association (DMA)

Dean, Jimmy

Defense News

demonstrations

in print ads

in television

desires

diagrams

Diaz, Cameron

DiGaetani, John Louis

direct ads

direct headlines

direct mail

alternative formats

brochure as

“classic” package

envelope teasers

flyers

increase response to

letter sells, brochure tells

match-and-fill

mechanics of

openings for, see openings for sales letters

as personal medium

popularity of

printing systems for

sales letter

salutations

typeface

variety of applications

directory ads

Direct Response Letter, The

display ads

distributed content filters

Dollar Shave Club

Domino’s Pizza

Donath, Bob

drawings

driving traffic to your Web site

affiliate marketing

banner ads

co-registration

e-mail marketing

keyword stuffing

online ads

search engines

viral marketing

Dropbox

DTC PR

DTM PR

Duncan Hines

DuPont

DVD

dynamic ads



E. F. Hutton

e-commerce Web sites

edutainment

Eicoff, Alvin

Elements of Style, The (Strunk and White)

e-list

Ellison, Harlan

e-mail marketing

“best” or “quality” claims

brevity

conversion series

delivery of

described

expanded copy

e-zines

filters, getting past

“FREE”

free touch

friendly tone

FROM line

headline

important points

lead-generation

length guidelines

long-copy

margins

mini-version of message

multiple response links

offer and response

opt-out statement

short-copy

SUBJECT line

teaser

tips for

types of

whitelists

words in all CAPS

eMarketer

emotional commercials

envelope teasers

Everybody Writes (Handley)

e-zine ads

design

types of

e-zines

ads

subscribers to

writing



Facebook

additional ad formats

ads

boosted and promoted posts

cost of ads

image ads

posting schedule

rules for conversations

structure of post

tips for writing posts

users

video ads

fact sheets

false logic

Farmers Insurance

feature articles

case histories

how-to articles

issue articles

news

features of a product

feedback

feelings

fictional characters, in print ads

first impressions

Flesch, Rudolf

floater

flyers

follower ads

Food and Drug Administration (FDA)

Forbes

Ford, Mark

Fortune

4 P’s formula

4 S formula

4 U’s formula

Fowler, Henry

fractional display ads

Freberg, Stan

free content. See content marketing

free information ads

freelance copywriters

art direction for

hiring, see hiring freelance copywriters

funnel approach

FutureSoft



Galantine Chicken

Gargano, Amil

GE

Geico

generational marketing

getting your copy written

AI software

client disrespect for copywriters

client-written copy

freelance copywriters

hiring copywriters

insourcing

reviewing and approving copy

working with copywriters

glossary

Good Housekeeping

Google

Google Search Engine Results Page (SERP)

graphic design

art direction

banner ads

copywriter’s rough

landing page

parting thoughts

in print ads

role of copywriter

tips for copywriters

graphic techniques for emphasis

graphs

guarantee ads



Halbert, Gary

Haller, Lori

Handley, Ann

handouts, for speeches

Hanson, Nancy Edmonds

Harry & David

Harshaw Chemical

Harvard Business Review

Hauptman, Don

headlines

basic types

for brochures

for catalogs

command

delivering a complete message

direct

drawing the reader into the body copy

e-mail marketing

evaluating tips

final word on

first impressions and

4 U’s formula

functions of

getting attention via

how-to

indirect

landing page

news

for print ads

question

reason-why

selecting the audience

for “swipe file”

techniques for producing

testimonial

Hebrew National Franks

Heineken

Hemingway, Ernest

Henning, Kathy

Herway, Jake

Hill, Dan

hiring copywriters

ask around

avoid interference

background project info

discussion of fees

expecting something for nothing

first step

industry experience

levels of skill

online

style in sync with your own

written agreement

Hitachi

Hoge, Cecil

Hopkins, Claude

house e-list

how-to articles

how-to headlines

How to Make Your Advertising Make Money (Caples)

How to Turn Words into Money (Nicholas)

How to Win Friends and Influence People (Carnegie)

HTML

HubSpot

human emotion

humor

in speeches

television commercials

Hyperlink



IBM

ideas, producing profitable advertising

Inc.

indirect ads

indirect headlines

information ads

inquiry fulfillment package

insourced writers

Instagram

Intel

Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB)

International Preview Society

Internet

changes wrought by

direct-to-consumer (DTC) PR

driving traffic to your Web site

online ads

research on

social media

three keys to writing copy in digital age

video

see also online marketing; Web sites

Internet Service Providers (ISPs), filters of

interviews

arranging and conducting

note taking

taping

telephone

introduction to copywriting

invent a word ads

invoice stuffers

issue articles



jargon

Jericho Communications

jingles

Johnson, Samuel

Johnson & Johnson

Joseph, Frank



Kelley, Tyler

keyword phrases

keyword stuffing

Kingston, Barry

Kirsch Communications

Kirshenbaum, Richard

Koch, David

Koch Engineering

Kornfeld, Lewis

Kraft Foods

Krone, Helmut



L.L. Bean

Lampropoulos, Parris

Landers, Ann

landing pages

additional guidelines

bullets

conversational style

copywriter’s rough for

credibility

driving traffic to

e-mail addresses of visitors

emotional copy

headline

money-back guarantee or lack of obligation

objectives

solving reader’s problem

testimonials

timely and current

tips for increasing conversion rates

layout

for brochures

for print ads

see also graphic design

lead-generation e-mail

lead magnet

lead paragraph

Learning Dynamics Incorporated

leave-behinds

L’eggs

Leisure Time Ice

letter ads

letter from the manufacturer

Levison, Ivan

lifestyle commercials

LinkedIn

professional profile

structure of post

text ads

types of ads

location ads

long-copy e-mail

short-copy vs.

long-copy landing page

Los Angeles Times



MacDougall, Malcolm

magazine ads

mail-order ads

classified

see also direct mail

M&M’s

Manning, Peyton

manuscript format for ad copy

maps

Maserati Import Company

Masonry Institute of St. Louis

Masterson, Michael

McDermott, Dylan

McDonald’s

McPhee, John

Mennen

Menzel, D. H.

Mercedes-Benz

Merrill Lynch

message bounces

meta description

microsites

long e-mail

short e-mail

Microsoft

Microsoft Word

Midas

millennials

Minwax Wood Finish

Modern Bride

Monk, Keith

Moore, Michael

motivating sequence

ask for action

get attention

prove your product can satisfy needs

show a need

solve the problem

multichannel marketing

changes in copywriting and

Mutual Life Insurance Company

My Pillow



Nader, Ralph

name squeeze page

National Car Rentals

Nationwide Insurance

native advertising

Net Words (Usborne)

New Process Company

news ads

news articles

news headlines

newsletters

newspaper ads

“new wave” ads

New York Times

Nicholas, Ted

nonbroadcast audiovisual (AV)

applications

PowerPoint

tips for writing

types of

Nordstrom

Norwegian Cruise Line

Noxema



offer ads

Ogilvy, David

one-sentence paragraphs

online ads

banner ads

e-zine ads

Facebook

LinkedIn

pay-per-click

video

online conversion

landing pages and

series e-mails

tips for increasing rates

online e-mail conversion series

online marketing

Agora Model of

ClickFunnels

common assignments

conversion

driving traffic to Web sites

e-commerce Web sites

e-mails, see e-mail marketing

home page

house e-list and

landing pages

SEO copywriting

single-page Web sites

successful

tips on Web site copy

online research

online surveys

online text ad

online video. See video

openings for sales letters

announcements

ask a question

flattery

free literature

human interest

identify reader’s problem

inside information

peer-to-peer

personalizing

president’s personal message

provocative quotes

state the offer

story format

stress a benefit

sweepstakes

Oppedahl, John F.

Opportunity

Orkin, Dick

Osmond, Marie

outline

outsourced writers

OxiClean Stain Remover



pamphlets

paragraphs, one-sentence

Parker, Robert B.

Parker, Roger C.

Parker, Sarah Jessica

Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw

pay-per-click (PPC) ads

keywords

structure of

PDFs

brochures

Pepsi

Pez

photos

in brochures

Facebook

press release

see also visuals

pie charts

Pierce, Eleanor

Pincus, Burton

Pinterest

point-of-sale literature

Polish, Joe

Popcorn, Faith

Popeye’s

pop-under

pop-up

Porsche

positioning

PowerPoint

effective use of

tips for preparing

Prentice Hall

preparing to write

determine objective of copy

documenting sources

interviews, see interviews

online surveys

organizing information

outline first

previously published material

producing ideas

questions about audience

questions about product

research

social media as information source

types of ads

writing process

preposition, ending sentence with

press releases

backgrounders

costs of

credibility of

distribution of

DTC PR

editors and

fact sheets

format and content tips

length

news content of

origin of release

photos

reproduction of

samples of

topics for

Prevention

price-and-where-to-buy ads

print ads

asking for action

believable

body copy

to build awareness

checklist of advertising ideas

classified ads

fractional display

to generate leads

headlines

how to write

information in

interesting

layout

lead paragraph

magazines

mail-order

manuscript format

missions

newspapers

to promote companies

response mechanisms

sales points in logical sequence

size of

slogans

tiny display

types of

visuals

Web site writing vs.

Printer’s Ink

Pritikin, Jordan

producing profitable advertising ideas

checklist

feedback

general knowledge

identify the problem

look for combinations

new ideas

pertinent facts

put problem aside

team up

product brochures

promotional newsletters

online

Prudential Insurance Company

psychology

Psychology Today

public relations materials

direct-to-consumer PR

feature articles

paid advertising differs from

press releases

promotional newsletters

query letters

speechwriting

Publishers Clearinghouse

puns

Purdue Chicken



query letters

question ads

question headlines

quiz ads



radio commercials

examples of

stars of

tips on writing

Ragan Communications

RDNS (reverse domain name system)

reader identification ads

Reality in Advertising (Reeves)

reason-why commercials

reason-why headlines

Reddit

Redmond, Lou

Reeves, Rosser

references

books

organizations

periodicals

Web sites and blogs

research

online

respect for copywriters, lack of

response mechanisms

reviewing copy. See copy, reviewing and approving

reward ads

Ries, Al

Ripley’s Believe It or Not

Roger C. Parker’s Guide to Web Content and Design

Rogers, Rutherford

Roman, Edith

Rosenblum, Sig

Rosenzweig, Mark

rotating banners

Rubicam, Raymond

Rushdie, Salman



Sacco, Joe

sales funnel

sales letter

mechanics

openings for

video

see also direct mail

sales literature

sans serif type

Satanic Verses, The (Rushdie)

Sawyer, Howard

Schwartz, Eugene

Scientific Advertising (Hopkins)

Scott, David Meerman

scripting

search engine optimization (SEO) copywriting

keyword stuffing

tips for

search engines

pay-per-click ads

secondary promise

Seiden, Hank

Seinfeld, Jerry

selling through writing

BDF formula

checklist of “copy motivators”

copy length

false logic and

features and benefits

generational marketing

know your customer

motivating sequences

positioning

secondary promise

USP, see unique selling proposition

sentence fragments

serif type

service brochures

sexist language

Shakespeare, William

short-copy landing page

short sections

short sentences

Showcase Pages

simple words

single-page Web sites

SLAM! Agency

Slaunwhite, Steve

slice-of-life commercials

slideshow format

Sloan, Heather

slogans

Smith, Terry C.

Snodell, Robert

social media

business pages

changes in marketing

Facebook

funnel approach

as information source

LinkedIn

phone apps

platforms

posting schedule

rules for conversations

summary of use

tips for writing posts

Twitter

software

AI

solo ad

solo e-mail

spam filters

getting past

triggering

Spears, Britney

speechwriting

audience

conversational tone

handouts

humor

length of

limiting scope

simplicity

speaker’s requirements

strong opening

title for speech

visuals

SPF (Sender Policy Framework)

Sponsored Content

Sponsored InMail

sponsorship ads

spotlight ads

Sprint

stand-up presenters

Stanton, Richard

Stella Artois beer

story ads

Strunk and White

stylistic techniques

beginning with conjunctions

bullets

ending with a preposition

graphic techniques for emphasis

one-sentence paragraphs

sentence fragments

subject line, writing to get attention with

subject matter experts (SMEs)

Super Bowl

SurfControl

SurveyMonkey

sweepstakes

“swipe file”



taglines

Target

teamwork

teaser e-mail

teasers

television commercials

animation

basic terms

continuing characters

creative approach

demonstrations

emotion

humor

informative approach

jingles

lifestyle

manuscript format for

reason-why

slice of life

stand-up presenters

straightforward presentations

testimonials

tips on writing

types of

viewer response to

visual as hero

testimonials

headlines

on television

text ads

tie-in with current events

Tighe, John Francis

tiny display ads

“Tips to Put Power in Your Business Writing”

title tag

transaction page

Trebek, Alex

Trout, Jack

Trump, Donald

Tumblr

Twedt, Carlin

Twitter

hashtags



ultra-specific headline

underlining

Uniline

unique headline

unique selling proposition (USP)

building long-term brand personality

defined

dramatizing a known benefit

dramatizing the product name or package

formulating a

requirements for

stressing little-known benefits

United Press International

U.S. Air Force

United Technologies

urgent headline

USA Today

Usborne, Nick

useful headline



Van Camp’s

Verizon

video

after writing script

changes in copywriting

corporate script

creative brief

explainer script

Facebook ads

how to write script

interviewing script

online script

resources

sales letters

script development

sixty-second TV and

start scriptwriting project

training

types of

visuals

video sales letters (VSLs)

videotext

Vimeo

viral marketing

visuals

for brochures

content marketing

Facebook

for PowerPoint

for press releases

for print ads

for speeches

video

see also graphic design; photos

Vitale, Joe

voice realm

Volkswagen



Wall Street Journal

Walmart

Web sites

credible

driving traffic to

e-commerce

keyword phrases

landing pages

print writing vs.

SEO copywriting

single-page, trouble with

writing, see online marketing

Weight Watchers

Wendy’s

Westinghouse

whiteboard animation videos

whitelists

white papers

budget

content

formats

length

marketing steps

media

metrics

problem identification

schedule

solution identification

tactics

target market

terminology

“Why Don’t Those Salespeople Sell”

Woolf, James

WordPress

Wordstream

working with copywriters

avoid wasted time

cooperation

critique copy

feedback and

pay fairly

pay on time

Writer

writer’s block

Writer’s Digest

writing process

cleaning up copy

editing work

getting it all down



Yahoo!

Yale, David

Young & Rubicam

“you-orientation”

YOURS beer

YouTube

Facebook video vs.



Zinsser, William





ALSO BY ROBERT W. BLY

Secrets of a Freelance Writer

Selling Your Services

The Digital Marketing Handbook

The New Email Revolution

The Direct Mail Revolution

The Elements of Business Writing

The Elements of Technical Writing

Careers for Writers

Public Relations Kit for Dummies

How to Write and Sell Simple Information for Fun and Profit





ABOUT THE AUTHOR



ROBERT W. BLY is a freelance copywriter specializing in business-to-business, high-tech, and direct response marketing.

He has four decades of experience writing ads, brochures, direct-mail packages, sales letters, publicity materials, e-mail campaigns, white papers, e-books, special reports, e-newsletters, banner ads, landing pages, squeeze pages, and Web sites for more than one hundred clients including Grumman, AlliedSignal, AT&T, IBM, Lucent Technologies, Medical Economics, McGraw-Hill, Philips Publishing, Forbes, KCI, Agora Publishing, Ken Roberts Company, and EBI Medical Systems.

Bob Bly has won a number of industry awards including a Gold Echo from the Direct Marketing Association, an IMMY from the Information Industry Association, two Southstar Awards, an American Corporate Identity Award of Excellence, and the Standard of Excellence award from the Web Marketing Association.

Robert W. Bly is the author of one hundred books including The Digital Marketing Handbook (Entrepreneur Press), Complete Idiot’s Guide to Direct Marketing (Alpha Books), and The New Email Revolution (Skyhorse)

His articles have appeared in such publications as Cosmopolitan, Chemical Engineering Progress, New Jersey Monthly, Writer’s Digest, and City Paper.

Robert W. Bly has taught copywriting at New York University and has presented sales and marketing seminars to numerous corporations, associations, and groups, including the Direct Marketing Creative Guild, Women’s Direct Response Group, American Chemical Society, Publicity Club of New York, Social Media World, and the International Tile Exposition.

Bob has been a guest on dozens of radio and TV shows including CNBC and CBS’s Hard Copy, and has been featured in periodicals ranging from Nation’s Business to the Los Angeles Times.

He is a member of the Business Marketing Association, Specialized Information Publishing Association, and the American Institute of Chemical Engineers. His online newsletter, Direct Response Letter, goes to thousands of subscribers weekly. You can subscribe for free at www.bly.com/reports.

For more information on Bob’s books, information products, consulting, and freelance copywriting services, contact:

Robert W. Bly.

Copywriter

31 Cheyenne Drive

Montville, NJ 07045

Phone: 973-263-0562

Fax: 973-263-0613

E-mail: rwbly@bly.com

Web site: www.bly.com, or sign up for email updates here.





Thank you for buying this

St. Martin’s Press ebook.



To receive special offers, bonus content,

and info on new releases and other great reads,

sign up for our newsletters.





Or visit us online at

us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup



For email updates on the author, click here.





CONTENTS


Title Page

Copyright Notice

Dedication

Epigraph

Preface to the Fourth Edition

Preface to the First Edition

A Note About You, the Reader

Acknowledgments

  1: An Introduction to Copywriting

  2: Writing to Get Attention: The Headline and Subject Line

  3: Writing to Communicate

  4: Writing to Sell

  5: Getting Ready to Write

  6: Writing Print Advertisements

  7: Writing Direct Mail

  8: Writing Brochures, Catalogs, and Other Printed and PDF Sales Materials

  9: Writing Public Relations Materials

10: Writing TV and Radio Commercials

11: Writing Web Sites

12: Writing Landing Pages

13: Writing E-mail Marketing

14: Writing Online Ads

15: Writing for Social Media

16: Writing for Video

17: Writing for Content Marketing

18: Getting Copy Written

19: Getting Your Copy Designed and Produced

Appendices:

Appendix A: Glossary of Advertising Terms

Appendix B: Periodicals

Appendix C: Web Sites and Blogs

Appendix D: Books

Appendix E: Organizations

Notes

Index

Also by Robert W. Bly

About the Author

Copyright





Published in the United States by St. Martin’s Griffin, an imprint of St. Martin’s Publishing Group


THE COPYWRITER’S HANDBOOK. Copyright © 1985, 2005, 2020 by Robert W. Bly. All rights reserved. For information, address St. Martin’s Publishing Group, 120 Broadway, New York, NY 10271.

www.stmartins.com

The Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available upon request.

ISBN 978-1-250-23801-6 (trade paperback)

ISBN 978-1-250-23800-9 (ebook)

eISBN 9781250238009

Our ebooks may be purchased in bulk for promotional, educational, or business use. Please contact the Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department at 1-800-221-7945, extension 5442, or by email at MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.

Originally published in the United States by Dodd, Mead & Company

First St. Martin’s Griffin Edition: April 2020





*  For an in-depth discussion of how to plan a multichannel marketing campaign, see my book The Marketing Plan Handbook, 2nd edition, published by Entrepreneur Press.



*  Yes, I know you use a PC, laptop, or tablet, and not a typewriter. But we were using typewriters when Judith said this back in 1982 or so, and I’ve decided to let the quote stand as is. Substitute “PC” or “mobile device” for “typewriter” in your own mind, if you like.





