Break the Writing into Short Sections


If the content of your ad can be organized as a series of sales points, you can cover each point in a separate section of copy. This isn’t necessary in short ads of 150 or fewer words. But as length increases, copy becomes more difficult to read. Breaking the text into several short sections makes reading easier.

What’s the best way to divide the text into sections? If you have a series of sections where one point follows logically from the previous point, or where the sales points are listed in order of importance, use numbers.

If there is no particular order of importance or logical sequence among the sales points, use graphic devices such as bullets, asterisks, or dashes to set off each new section. If you have a lot of copy under each section, use subheads (as I’ve done in this book).

Paragraphs should also be kept short. Long, unbroken chunks of type intimidate readers. A page filled with a solid column of tiny type says, “This is going to be tough to read!”

When you edit your copy, use subheads to separate major sections. Leave space between paragraphs. And break long paragraphs into short paragraphs. A paragraph of five sentences can usually be broken into two or three shorter paragraphs by finding places where a new thought or idea is introduced and beginning the new paragraph with that thought.





* * *



FOLLOW THE SIMPLE 4 S FORMULA

Here are 4 simple writing principles that can do more than any other writing techniques to make your copy clear and easy to read:

Short words.

Short sentences.

Short paragraphs.

Short sections.





* * *





4. Use Short Sentences


Short sentences are easier to read than long sentences. All professional writers—newspaper reporters, publicists, magazine writers, copywriters—are taught to write in crisp, short, snappy sentences.

Long sentences tire and puzzle your readers. By the time they have gotten to the end of a lengthy sentence, they don’t remember what was at the beginning.

D. H. Menzel, coauthor of Writing a Technical Paper, conducted a survey to find the best length for sentences in technical papers. He found that sentences became difficult to understand beyond a length of about 34 words. And the consumer has far less patience with wordiness and run-on sentences than does the scientist studying an important report.

Rudolf Flesch, best known for his classic books Why Johnny Can’t Read and The Art of Plain Talk, said the best average sentence length for business writing is 14 to 16 words. Twenty to 25 words is passable, he added, but above 40 words, the writing becomes unreadable.

Because ad writers place a premium on clarity, their sentences are even shorter than Flesch’s recommended: 14- to 16-word average.

Now, let’s take a look at how you can reduce sentence length. First, you should break large sentences into two or more separate sentences whenever possible.

Today every penny of profit counts and Gorman-Rupp wants your pumps to work for all they’re worth.

Today every penny of profit counts. And Gorman-Rupp wants your pumps to work for all they’re worth.



This article presents some findings from surveys conducted in Haiti in 1977 that provide retrospective data on the age at menarche of women between the ages of 15 and 49 years.

This article presents some findings from surveys conducted in Haiti in 1977. These surveys provide retrospective data on the age at menarche of women between the ages of 15 and 49 years.



Another method of breaking up a long sentence is to use punctuation to divide it into two parts.

One purpose is to enable you to recognize and acknowledge the importance of people who handle people from the company president right down to the newest foreman.

One purpose is to enable you to recognize and acknowledge the importance of people who handle people—from the company president right down to the newest foreman.



The outcome is presentations that don’t do their job and make others wonder whether you’re doing yours.

The outcome is presentations that don’t do their job … and make others wonder whether you’re doing yours.



Copy becomes dull when all sentences are the same length. To make your writing flow, vary sentence length. By writing an occasional short sentence or sentence fragment, you can reduce the average sentence length of your copy to an acceptable length even if you frequently use lengthy sentences.

Over thirty thousand aerospace engineers are members now. To join them, send your check for $146 with the coupon below and become a member today.

Over thirty thousand aerospace engineers are members now. Join them. Send your check for $146 with the coupon below and become a member today.



Now, discover the Splint-Lock System, a simply beautiful, effective, and versatile chair-side splinting technique that helps you stabilize teeth quickly, easily, and economically.

Now, discover the Splint-Lock System … a simply beautiful, effective, and versatile chair-side splinting technique that helps you stabilize teeth. Quickly. Easily. And economically.



Train yourself to write in crisp, short sentences. When you have finished a thought, stop. Start the next sentence with a new thought. When you edit, your cursor should automatically seek out places where a long string of words can be broken in two.





5. Use Small, Simple Words


Simple words communicate more effectively than big words. People use big words to impress others, but they rarely do. More often, big words annoy and distract the reader from what the writer is trying to say.

Yet big words persist, because using pompous language makes the reader or speaker feel important. Some recent examples of big words in action:

In his sermon, a Unitarian minister says: “If I were God, my goal would be to maximize goodness, not to eternalize evil.”

In a cartoon appearing in Defense News, a manager tells his staff: “I want you to focalize on your optionalizations, prioritize your parametrics, budgetize your expendables, and then schedualize your throughput.” Fred Danzig, writing in Advertising Age, asks why an E. F. Hutton executive says the market might “whipsaw back and forth” when he could have said it “will go up and down.”

In advertising copy, you are trying to communicate with people, not impress them or boost your own ego. Avoid pompous words and fancy phrases. Cecil Hoge, the mail-order expert, says the words in your copy should be “like the windows in a storefront. The reader should be able to see right through them and see the product.”

The column at left lists some big words that have appeared over the years in ads, brochures, and articles. The column at right offers simpler—and preferable—substitutions.

Big Word



Substitute Word or Phrase



obtain



get



operate



run, use



optimum



best



parameters



factors



prioritize



set priorities, rank



procure



get



perspiration



sweat



purchase



buy



substantiate



prove



select



pick



superior



best



utilize



use



terminate



end, finish



visage



face



Small words are better than big words whether you’re writing to farmers or physicists, fishermen or financiers. “Even the best-educated people don’t resent simple words,” says John Caples. “But [simple words] are the only words many people understand.”

Ernest Hemingway famously said, “Poor Faulkner. Does he really think big emotions come from big words? He thinks I don’t know the ten-dollar words. I know them all right. But there are older and simpler and better words, and those are the ones I use.”

And don’t think your copy will be ignored because you write in plain English. In Shakespeare’s most famous sentence—“To be or not to be?”—the biggest word is three letters long.





6. Avoid Technical Jargon


Industrial copy isn’t the only writing that uses technical jargon. Here’s a sample from a Porsche ad that ran in Forbes:

The new Porsche has a new 2.5-liter, 4-cylinder, aluminum-silicon alloy Porsche engine—designed at Weissach, and built at Zuffen-hausen.

It achieves maximum torque of 137.2 ft-lbs as early as 3,000 rpm, and produces 143 hp at 5,500 rpm.

The new model also has the Porsche transaxle design, Porsche aerodynamics, and Porsche handling.



Like many Forbes readers, I’m not an automotive engineer. I didn’t know that torque is achieved in foot-pounds, or that 3,000 rpm is considered early for achieving it. I know hp is “horsepower” and rpm is “revolutions per minute,” but I don’t know whether 143 hp at 5,500 rpm is good, bad, or mediocre.

The point is: don’t use jargon when writing to an audience that doesn’t speak your special language. Jargon is useful for communicating within a small group of experts. But used in copy aimed at outsiders, it confuses the reader and obscures the selling message.

IT professionals have created a new language: machine intelligence, quantum computing, terabyte, gigahertz, raster image, and wireframe. But non-computer people may not know the vocabulary.

A business executive may know the meaning of “software” and “hardware,” but not understand terms like “interprocess message buffer,” “asynchronous software interrupt,” and “four-byte integer data type.” When you use jargon, you enjoy an economy of words, but you risk turning off readers who don’t understand this technical shorthand.

Computer experts aren’t the only technicians who baffle us with their lingo. Wall Streeters use an alien tongue when they speak of downside ticks, standstills, sideways consolidation, and revenue enhancements. Hospital administrators, too, have a language all their own: cost outliers, prospective payments, catchment areas, diagnostic-related groups, and ICD-9 codes.

Because advertisers are specialists, it is they—not their copywriters—who most often inflict jargon on readers. One of my clients rewrote some brochure copy so that their storage silo didn’t merely dump grain; the grain was “gravimetrically conveyed.”

When is it okay to use technical terms, and when is it best to explain the concept in plain English? I have two rules:

RULE #1: Don’t use a technical term unless 95 percent or more of your readers will understand it. If your client insists you use jargon that is unfamiliar to your readers, be sure to explain these terms in your copy.

RULE #2: Don’t use a technical term unless it precisely communicates your meaning. I would use software because there is no simpler, shorter way to say it. But instead of using deplane, I would just say, “Get off the plane.”





7. Be Concise


Good copy is concise. Unnecessary words waste the reader’s time, dilute the sales message, and take up space that could be put to better use.

Rewriting is the key to producing concise copy. When you write your first draft, the words just flow, and you can’t help being chatty. In the editing stage, unnecessary words are deleted to make the writing sparkle with vigor and clarity.

One copywriter I know describes her copy as a “velvet slide”—a smooth path leading the prospect from initial interest to final sale. Excess words are bumps and obstacles that block the slide.

For example, a writing consultant’s Web site says his clients receive “informed editorial consideration of their work.” As opposed to uninformed? Delete informed.

An ad in a writer’s magazine refers to “incomplete manuscripts still in progress.” Obviously, a manuscript still in progress is incomplete.

Make your writing concise. Avoid redundancies, run-on sentences, wordy phrases, the passive voice, unnecessary adjectives, and other poor stylistic habits that take up space but add little to meaning or clarity. Edit your writing to remove unnecessary words, phrases, sentences, and paragraphs.

Here are some examples of wordy phrases and how to make them more concise.

Wordy Phrase

Concise Substitute



at first glance

at first



the number 20

20



free gift

gift



whether or not

whether



a general principle

a principle



a specific example

an example



he is a man who

he



they managed to use

they used



from a low of 6 to a high of 16

from 6 to 16



a wide variety of different models

a variety of models



approximately 17 tons or so

approximately 17 tons



expert specialists

specialists



simple and easy to use

easy to use



can help you

helps you



can be considered to be

is



most unique

unique



the one and only

the only



comes to a complete stop

stops



the entire issue

the issue



dull and boring

boring



on an annual basis

yearly



in the form of

as



exhibits the ability to

can



as you may or may not know

as you may know



a substitute used in place of

a substitute for



features too numerous to mention

many features



John, Jack, Fred, Tom, etc.

John, Jack, Fred, and Tom



feminine hygiene products for women

feminine hygiene products



where you were born originally

where you were born



your own home

your home



a product that you can use

a product you can use



RAM memory*

RAM



* RAM stands for “random access memory.” So a RAM memory is a “random access memory memory.”





8. Be Specific


Advertising persuades us by giving specific information about the product being advertised. The more facts you include in your copy, the better. Copywriters who don’t bother to dig for specifics produce vague, weak, meaningless copy.

“If those who have studied the art of writing are in accord on any one point,” write Strunk and White in The Elements of Style, “it is this: the surest way to arouse and hold the attention of the reader is by being specific, definite, and concrete. The greatest writers—Homer, Dante, Shakespeare—are effective largely because they deal in particulars and report the details that matter.”

When you sit down at the PC, your file of background information should have at least twice as much material as you will end up using in the final version of your ad. When you have a warehouse of facts to choose from, writing copy is easy: you just select the most important facts and describe them in a clear, concise, direct fashion.

But when copywriters have little to say, they fall back on fancy phrases and puffed-up expressions to fill the empty space on the page. The words sound nice but say nothing of value. And the ad doesn’t sell because it doesn’t inform.





9. Go Straight to the Point


If the headline is the most important part of an ad, then the lead paragraph is surely the second most important part. It is this lead that either lures the reader into the text by fulfilling the promise of the headline, or bores the reader with uninteresting, irrelevant, unnecessary words.

The first piece of copy I ever wrote was a brochure describing an airport radar system. Here’s the lead:

Times change. Today’s airports handle a far greater volume of traffic than the airports of the late 1960s.

Radars of that era were not built with an eye toward the future and could not handle the rapidly increasing demands placed upon terminal air traffic control systems.

The air traffic handled by today’s airports continues to increase at a tremendous rate. An airport surveillance radar must be built to handle not only today’s airport traffic but also the more complex air traffic control requirements of tomorrow’s airports.



All this is true, and as a layman I found it interesting. But the person reading the brochure is in charge of air traffic control at a large or medium-size airport. Doesn’t he already know that air traffic volume is increasing? If so, I am wasting his time by repeating the obvious. Many novice copywriters fall into this trap. They spend the first few paragraphs “warming up” before they get to the sales pitch. By the time they do start talking about the product, most readers have fled.

Start selling with the very first line of copy. Here’s how I should have written the lead to that radar brochure:

The X-900 radar detects even the smallest commercial aircraft out to a range of 145 miles. What’s more, the system’s L-band operating efficiency makes it 40 times more efficient than S-band radars.



If you feel the need to “warm up” as you set your thoughts on paper, do so. But delete these warm-ups from your final draft. The finished copy should sell from the first word to the last.

Here’s another example of copy that fails to get to the point:

AIM HIGH. REACH FOR NEW HORIZONS

It’s never easy. But reaching for new horizons is what aiming high is all about. Because to reach for new horizons you must have the vision to see things not only as they are, but as they could be.…



Why write vague copy like this? The ad tries to be dramatic, but the result is empty rhetoric; the copy does not give a clue as to what is being advertised.

This copy appeared in a U.S. Air Force recruitment ad. The benefits of joining the air force are travel, vocational training, and the chance to fly jets. Why not feature these points right off?





10. Write in a Friendly, Conversational Style


Ann Landers was one of the most widely read columnists in the country. Why was she so popular? Said Ann, “I was taught to write like I talk.”

People enjoy reading clear, simple, easy-to-understand writing. And the simplest, clearest style is to write the way you talk. (The writing experts call this “conversational tone.”)

Conversational tone is especially important in advertising, where the printed page is an economical substitute for a salesperson. (The only reason companies advertise is that advertising can reach more people at less cost than a traveling salesperson can.) A light, conversational style is much easier to read than the stiff, formal prose of business, science, and academia. And when you write simply, you become the reader’s friend. When you write pompously, you become a bore.

In the 1980s, IBM’s famous Charlie Chaplin ads and commercials launched IBM’s first PC and helped make it a bestseller. This ad series was a model of friendly, helpful, conversational copy. Here’s a sample:

There’s a world of information just waiting for you. But to use it, study it, enjoy it and profit from it, you first have to get at it. Yet the facts can literally be right at your fingertips—with your own telephone, a modem, and the IBM Personal Computer.



Note the use of colloquial expressions (“a world of information,” “at your fingertips”) and the informal language (“just waiting for you,” “you first have to get at it”). IBM seems to want to help us on a person-to-person level, and its copy has the sound of one friend talking to another.

So how do you go about it? In an article in the Wall Street Journal, John Louis DiGaetani recommends this simple test for conversational tone: “As you revise, ask yourself if you would ever say to your reader what you are writing. Or imagine yourself speaking to the person instead of writing.”

My former boss once wrote a sales letter that began, “Enclosed please find the literature you requested.” I asked him, “If you were handing this envelope to me instead of mailing it, what would you say?”

“Well, I’d say, ‘Here is the information you asked for’ or ‘I’ve enclosed the brochure you requested’ or something like that.” “Then why not write it that way?” I replied. He did.

And to help you write the way you talk, here are some tips for achieving a natural, conversational style:

Use pronouns—I, we, you, they.

Use colloquial expressions—a sure thing, turn-on, rip-off, okay.

Use contractions—they’re, you’re, it’s, here’s, we’ve, I’m.

Use simple words.

If you must choose between writing naturally and being grammatically correct, write naturally.





11. Editing to Avoid Sexist Language


The day of the advertising man, salesman, and Good Humor man are over. Now it’s the advertising professional, salesperson, and Good Humor vendor.

Copywriters must avoid sexist language. Like it or not, sexist language offends a large portion of the population, and you don’t sell things to people by getting them angry at you.

In this age of LGBTQ, handling gender in writing is a sensitive issue. Here are a few tips:

•  Use plurals. Instead of “the doctor receives a report on his patients,” write, “the doctors receive reports on their patients.”

•  Rewrite to avoid reference to gender. Instead of “the manager called a meeting of his staff,” write, “the manager called a staff meeting.”

•  Alternate gender references. In the past, I used his and he throughout my copy. Now, I alternate he with she and his with her.

•  Use “he and she” and “his and her.” This works in simple sentences. But it can become cumbersome in such sentences as, “When he or she punches his or her time card, he or she is automatically switched to his or her overtime pay rate.” When you use he and she and his and her, alternate these with she and he and her and his.

•  Do not use the awkward constructions he/she or his/her. Instead, write “he or she” or “his or her.”

•  Create an imaginary person to establish gender. For example: “Let’s say Doris Franklin is working overtime. When she punches her time card, she is automatically switched to her overtime pay rate.”

Sexist Term

Nonsexist Substitute



anchorman

anchor



advertising man

advertising professional



chairman

chairperson



cleaning woman

domestic



Englishmen

the English



fireman

firefighter



foreman

supervisor



a man who

someone who



man the exhibit

run the exhibit



man of letters

writer



mankind

humanity



manpower

personnel, staff



man-made

artificial, manufactured



man-hours

work hours



Mrs., Miss

Ms.



newsman, newspaperman

reporter



postman

mail carrier



policeman

police officer



salesman

salesperson



stewardess

flight attendant



weatherman

meteorologist



workman

worker





A FEW TRICKS OF THE TRADE


Copywriters use a number of stylistic techniques to pack a lot of information into a few short paragraphs of smooth-flowing copy. Here are a few tricks of the trade.





End with a Preposition


Ending a sentence with a preposition adds to the conversational tone of the copy. And it’s a perfectly acceptable technique endorsed by William Zinsser, Rudolf Flesch, Henry Fowler, and most other authorities on modern writing. Some examples:

He’s the kind of fellow with whom you love to have a chat.

He’s the kind of fellow you love to have a chat with.



Air pollution is something of which we want to get rid.

Air pollution is something we want to get rid of.



For what are we fighting?

What are we fighting for?





Use Sentence Fragments


Sentence fragments help keep your average sentence length to a respectable number of words. And sentence fragments can add drama and rhythm to your copy.

Basic Eye Emphasizer does it all. It’s the one eye makeup everyone needs. The only one.

Not one of the Fortune 1000 companies even comes close to our rate of growth. And no wonder. Smartphones are the hottest product of the 2020s, with no end to demand in sight.

It doesn’t take much to block the door to success. A flash of an idea that slips your mind. A note that never gets written.





Begin Sentences with Conjunctions


Beginning a sentence with and, or, but, or for makes for a smooth, easy transition between thoughts.

Use these simple words instead of more complex connectives. But is a shorter, better way of saying nevertheless, notwithstanding, and conversely. And don’t use such antiquated phrases as equally important, moreover, and furthermore when and will do just as well.

The first lesson is free. But I can’t call you. You have to take the first step.

The choice is simple. Be a pencil pusher. Or get the Messenger. And move ahead at the speed of sound.

ECS phones the first two numbers you’ve selected until someone answers. It announces the emergency. Gives your address. And repeats it.





Use One-Sentence Paragraphs


An occasional one-sentence paragraph provides a change of pace that can liven up a piece of copy. When all sentences and paragraphs are pretty much the same, the reader is lulled into a stupor, just as a driver can be hypnotized by a long stretch of straight road. A one-sentence paragraph is like a sudden curve in the road—it can shock your reader to wakefulness again. Here’s an example from a sales letter pitching freelance copy-writing services:

For many ad agency people, industrial advertising is a difficult chore. It’s detailed work, and highly technical. To write the copy, you need someone with the technical know-how of an engineer and the communications skills of a copywriter.

That’s where I can help.





Use Graphic Techniques to Emphasize Words or Phrases in the Copy


College students use yellow markers to highlight sentences in their textbooks. This saves time in studying, since the highlights allow them to reread only the important material and not the entire book.

Highlighting and underlining can make words and phrases stand out in print advertising and promotion as well as in schoolbooks. Many readers skim copy without reading it carefully, so an underline or highlight can be useful in calling out key words, phrases, paragraphs, and selling points.

Of course, underlines and other mechanical devices should be used sparingly. If you underline every other word in your sales letter, nothing stands out. On the other hand, if you underline only three words in a one-page letter, you can be sure most readers will read those words. Here is a list of mechanical techniques copywriters use to call attention to key words and phrases:

underlines

capital letters

indented paragraphs

boldface type

italics

colored type

simulated handwriting fonts

arrows and notes in margins

yellow highlighting

reverse type (white type on black background)

boxed copy

call-outs

P.S. (in letters)





Use Bullets


One of the most effective techniques for writing copy is to present the content as a list of bulleted items (e.g., “7 ways to reduce your heating bill this winter”). Many copywriters rattle off the bullets quickly—and as a result settle for bullets that are ordinary and therefore not engaging.

It takes a bit more energy and creativity to come up with a bullet item that is as strong and compelling as this classic from Boardroom: “What Never to Eat on an Airplane.”

One of the most common mistakes with bullets is not including the right level of information. “Tell too much, and you give away the information free, and there is no need to order the product to find the answer,” says copywriter Parris Lampropoulos. “For example, if your bullet says ‘how to erase pain by using an over-the-counter lotion called capsaicin,’ no curiosity is generated because you’ve already told the secret.”

On the other hand, says Parris, if your bullet contains too little information, or not enough specific information, it fails to grab attention. “If you say ‘why B vitamins are an absolute must for people predisposed to this disease,’ you fail to hook me, because I don’t know what ‘this disease’ is,” says Parris.

His rule of thumb for writing strong bullets: Be specific about the problem; be vague and mysterious about the solution. Plus, do it with a twist, hook, or unusual angle.

Parris gives as an example a copywriter who had to write a promotion for a book on natural health. One of the tips in the book was that sitting on bulky objects can cause back pain. So if you have a big, bulging wallet, take it out of your back pocket and keep it in your front pocket to prevent back stress. The bullet that the copywriter came up with: “How a pickpocket can make your back pain better.” He is specific about the problem (back pain), but mysterious about the solution (how can a pickpocket help with back pain?).





A COPYWRITER’S CHECKLIST


Before you release copy to the client or the art department, ask yourself these questions:

•  Does the copy fulfill the promise of the headline? If the headline is “How to Win Friends and Influence People,” the copy should tell you how to win friends and influence people. Copy that doesn’t fulfill the promise of the headline cheats the reader—and the reader knows it.

•  Is the copy interesting? Your copy can’t generate enthusiasm for the product if the reader yawns as she reads it. Tell a story, give news, improve the reader’s life. Make it interesting. You can’t bore people into buying your product.

•  Is it easy to read? When a person reads your copy, it is not his job to try to figure out what you mean. It is your job to explain what you mean in plain, simple English. Use short sentences, short paragraphs, small words. Be clear.

•  Is it believable? Once a teacher said of a phrase I had written, “Bob, this has all the sincerity of a three-dollar bill.” People mistrust advertising and advertising professionals. You must work hard to convince the reader that what you say is true. One way to establish credibility is to include testimonials from satisfied customers. Another is to offer a demonstration or scientific evidence that proves your claim. But the best way to get people to believe you is to tell the truth.

•  Is it persuasive? Clear, readable prose is not enough. Your copy must sell as well as communicate. To sell, your copy must get attention … hook the reader’s interest … create a desire for the product … prove the product’s superiority … and ask for action. (Chapter 4 covers the basics of salesmanship in print.)

•  Is it specific? To persuade people to buy, you have to give them specifics—facts, features, benefits, savings—reasons why they should buy the product. The more specific you are, the more informative and believable your copy.

•  Is it concise? Tell the whole story in as few words as possible. When you are finished, stop.

•  Is it relevant? Freelance copywriter Sig Rosenblum explained: “One of the rules of good copy is: Don’t talk about yourself. Don’t tell the reader what you did, what you achieved, what you like or don’t like. That’s not important to him. What’s important to him is what he likes, what he needs, what he wants.” Make sure your copy discusses facts that are relevant to the reader’s self-interest.

•  Does it flow smoothly? Good copy flows smoothly from one point to the next. There are no awkward phrases, no confusing arguments, and no strange terms to jar the reader and break the flow.

•  Does it call for action? Do you want the consumer to switch to your brand, send for a free brochure, call your sales representative, send you a check? Find the next step in the buying process and tell the reader to take it. Use coupons, reply cards, toll-free numbers, and other such devices to increase response.





WRITING FOR PRINT VS. WEB


Chapters 11 through 17 go into greater detail on the differences between writing for print versus writing for the Web. For example:

Serif type, with little curls at the ends of the letters, is preferred for print. San serif type, without the curls, is more readable on screens. Times Roman is a serif type and Arial is a sans serif type.

E-mail marketing is easier to read when the paragraphs are just one or two sentences each; the proof is in the greater open and click-through rates. And each line should be no longer than 60 characters; longer than that makes the e-mails look more foreboding.

On Web sites, the topics are conveniently divided among multiple Web pages, each focusing on just one topic in no more than three hundred to four hundred words. Breaking writing into bite-size chunks has long been a strategy for more readable writing, and multipage Web sites are an ideal medium in which to employ this writing method.

Most offline documents have a single communication mode: black ink printed on white paper. But the Web extends to more varied formats and media including audio, video, color, and animation.

A book can reference other books in its bibliography. On the Web, you can hyperlink to pages within your site as well as to content on a billion other sites. So added detail is quickly accessible to the reader.

The Web is a two-way communication channel. Example: You write a blog post. Your readers comment. Similarly, you go to a Web site and have a conversation with a chat bot.

When your reader gets your catalog in the mail, he can place it on a shelf for future reference, where he probably sees it every day. When your reader is finished browsing your Web site, he clicks away and has nothing tangible in his hands.

Thanks to Google’s search engine, it is much easier to quickly find the information you are looking for. Google has access to over a million terabytes, all delivered to your screen within a second. Libraries hold a minuscule fraction of that, often buried in stacks and so time-consuming to locate.

Writing for the Web means using keywords people would search for to find your content or product (chapter 11), as well as avoiding words in e-mails that trigger spam filters (chapter 13).

First drafts of Web pages do not have to be perfect. Reason: because they are digital, they are easy to correct, change, and update.





4



WRITING TO SELL



“The object of advertising is to sell goods,” said Raymond Rubicam of Young & Rubicam. “It has no other justification worth mentioning.”

For the beginning copywriter, this may be a new idea. If you’ve done other kinds of writing—magazine articles, news reporting, fiction, technical writing—you know how to express yourself in clear, simple English. You know how to write words that inform, and maybe even words that amuse or entertain. But now, you’re faced with a new challenge: writing words that convince the reader to buy your product.

This puts most writers on uncertain ground. There are many choices you have to make, and unless you’re experienced in sales or advertising, you don’t know how to make them.

For example, should you write a lot of copy, or is it better to write short copy? (If you write a lot of copy, will people read it? Or is it true that people won’t read ads with more than a couple of paragraphs?)

Do you need some clever gimmick, slogan, or sexy model to get the reader’s attention? Or should you concentrate on the product when you write?

If your product has a minor advantage over the competition, should you focus on that advantage? Or should you concentrate on the general benefits of using the product (which the reader gets from both your product and your competitor’s)? What do you do if there is no difference between your product and the competition’s?

How do you know whether what you’re writing will be convincing or interesting to the reader? If you think of two or three ideas for an ad, how do you pick the best one?

Let’s start finding out the answers to these questions.





FEATURES AND BENEFITS


The first step in writing copy that sells is to write about benefits and not about features.

A feature is a descriptive fact about a product or service; it’s what the product is or has. A benefit is what the product does; it’s what the user of the product or service gains as a result of the feature.

For example, I’m writing this book on a PC. A feature of the machine is that it allows me to edit and revise what I’m typing electronically, so I can move a sentence or add a word without retyping the whole page. The benefit of this feature is that I save a lot of time and can increase my productivity (and make more money) as a result.

Another example: A second feature of my PC is that it has a keyboard connected to the main unit with a coil cable. The benefit is that I can position the keyboard for maximum typing comfort.

In its pamphlet “Why Don’t Those Salespeople Sell,” Learning Dynamics Incorporated, a sales training firm, cites poor ability to present benefits as one of ten reasons why salespeople fail to make the sale. “Customers don’t buy products or services,” the firm explains. “They buy what these products and services are going to do for them. Yet many salespeople describe only the features, assuming the customer knows the benefits. Salespeople need to know how to translate features into benefits, and then present them in a customer-centered language.”

The same goes for copywriters. Novices tend to write about features: the facts, figures, and statistics at hand. Experienced copywriters turn those features into customer benefits: reasons why the reader should buy the product.

Here’s a simple technique for digging out a product’s benefits. Divide a sheet of paper into two columns. Label the left-hand column “Features” and the right-hand column “Benefits.”

In the left-hand column write down all the features of the product. Some of these you’ll find in the background material you’ve collected on the product (chapter 5 tells you what background material to collect). The rest you can learn by examining and using the product or by talking with people involved with the product: customers, salespeople, distributors, engineers.

Then, go down the list of features and ask yourself, “What benefit does this feature provide to the customer? How does this feature make the product more attractive, useful, enjoyable, or affordable?”

When you complete the list, the right-hand column will contain all the benefits the product offers the customer. These are the sales points that should be included in your copy.

Try this exercise with a common household product that you have nearby. Below is my features/benefits checklist for a No. 2 pencil. Can you add to this list or think of a stronger way to state the benefits?

Features

Benefits



Pencil is a wooden cylinder.

Can be resharpened as often as you like to ensure clear writing.



Cylinder is hexagonal.

Won’t roll off your desk.



One end is capped by a rubber eraser.

Convenient eraser lets you correct writing errors cleanly and quickly.



Eraser is attached with a tight-fitting metal band.

Holds eraser snugly in place; no pencils ruined by eraser coming loose.



Pencil is 7½ inches long.

7½-inch graphite core ensures long writing life.



Pencil is ¼ inch in diameter.

Slender shape makes it easy to hold and comfortable to write with.



Pencil is No. 2.

Graphite core is blended for just the right hardness—writes smoothly yet crisply.



Yellow exterior.

Bright, attractive exterior—stands out in a pencil holder or desk drawer.



Sold by the dozen.

One stop to the store gives you enough pencils to last for months.



Also available in a box containing a gross.

Easier purchasing and lower price per unit for large-volume users such as business offices and schools.



Made in the U.S.A.

A quality product. (Also, buying American-made strengthens U.S. economy.)



Now that you have a list of customer benefits, you must decide which sales point is the most important, the one you will feature in your headline as the “theme” of the ad. You also have to decide which of the other points you will include and which you will not use. And you have to arrange these points in some sort of logical order.

Let’s take a look at a handy five-step sequence that can help you put your sales points in an order that will lead the reader from initial interest to final sale.





THE MOTIVATING SEQUENCE


Over the years, many advertising writers have developed “copy formulas” for structuring ads, commercials, and sales letters.

The best known of these formulas is AIDA, which stands for Attention, Interest, Desire, Action.

According to AIDA, the copy must first get the reader’s attention, then create an interest in the product, then turn that interest into a strong desire to own the product, and finally ask the reader to buy the product or take some other action that will eventually lead to a sale.

A second well-known formula is ACCA: Awareness, Comprehension, Conviction, Action. In ACCA, consumers are first made aware that the product exists. Then they must comprehend what the product is and what it will do for them. After comprehension, the readers must be convinced to buy the product. And finally, they must take action and actually make the purchase.

A third famous formula is the 4 P’s: Picture, Promise, Prove, Push. The copywriter creates a picture of what the product can do for the reader, promises the picture will come true if the reader buys the product, proves what the product has done for others, and pushes for immediate action.

A fourth and my personal favorite is the “motivating sequence,” a five-step formula for writing copy that sells.





1. Get Attention


This is the job of the headline and the visual. The headline should focus on the single strongest benefit you can offer the reader.

Some copywriters try to hook the reader with clever phrases, puns, or irrelevant information, then save the strongest benefit for a big windup finish. A mistake. If you don’t hook the reader with the strongest benefit—the most important reason why he or she should be interested in what you’re selling—the reader won’t get past the headline. (For more tips on headline writing, see chapter 2.)





2. Show a Need


All products, to some degree, solve some problem or fill a need. A car solves the problem of getting to and from work. An air conditioner prevents you from sweltering in summer heat. Toothpaste with fluoride keeps your teeth from getting holes in them. And mouthwash saves you the embarrassment of having bad breath.

However, with most products, the need for the product may not be obvious or it may not be ingrained in the reader’s mind. The second step of writing copy that sells, then, is to show the reader why she needs the product.

For example, many small-business owners do their own taxes and haven’t thought about hiring an accountant. But an accountant, with his or her superior knowledge of taxes, can take advantage of the latest tax regulations and save the business owner hundreds or even thousands of dollars in income tax.

So one tax reduction firm’s TV commercial promises: if you owe the IRS $10,000 or more, we can help you settle the unpaid taxes you owe for pennies on the dollar.





3. Satisfy the Need and Position Your Product as a Solution to the Problem


Once you’ve convinced readers that they have a need, you must quickly show them that your product can satisfy this need, answer their questions, or solve their problems.

An ad for a CPA firm might begin like this:

WOULD YOU PAY $1,000 TO SAVE $5,500?

Last year, a local flower shop decided to hire an accountant to do their income tax returns. They worried about the seemingly high fee, but realized they didn’t have the time—or the expertise—to do it themselves.

You can imagine how delighted they were when they hired an accountant who showed them how they could pay thousands of dollars less in income tax than they originally thought they would owe.

I am their accountant, and I’d like to tell you how the flower shop—and dozens of other firms whose taxes I prepare—have saved $2,000 … $3,500 … even $5,500 a year or more by taking advantage of legitimate tax regulations, deductions, and shelters.



This copy isn’t perfect. It needs some work. But it does get attention, highlights a major benefit (saving money), and shows that the service being advertised can satisfy the need.





4. Prove Your Product Can Do What You Say It Can Do


It isn’t enough to say you can satisfy readers’ needs—you’ve got to prove you can. You want the readers to risk their hard-earned money on your product or service. You want them to buy from or hire you instead of your competitors. How do you demonstrate your superiority over the competition? How do you get the readers to believe what you say?

Here are a few proven techniques for convincing the readers that it’s to their advantage to do business with you:

•  Talk about the benefits of your product or service (use the features/benefits list as the source of your discussion). Give the readers reasons to buy by showing the benefits they’ll get when they own your product.

•  Use testimonials. In testimonials, others who have bought the product praise the product in their own words. This third-party endorsement is much more convincing than manufacturers praising their own product.

•  Compare your product to the competition’s. Show, benefit for benefit, how you are superior. But have documentation supporting your claim in case your copy is challenged.

•  If you have conducted studies to prove your product’s superiority, cite this evidence in the copy. Offer a free reprint of the study to interested readers. For dietary supplements, the proof is clinical studies—preferably randomized, double-blind, controlled clinical trials—published in peer-reviewed medical journals.

•  Show that your company is reliable and will be in business a long time. Talk about number of employees, size of distributor network, annual sales, number of years in business, growth rate.





5. Ask for Action


The last step in any piece of copy should always be a call for action. If the product is sold by mail, ask readers to mail in an order form, or go online to buy. If the product is sold retail, ask readers to clip the ad and bring it into the store.

If your ad doesn’t sell the product directly, then find out the next step in the buying process and tell your readers about it. For example, you might offer a free brochure on the product, a demonstration, or a sample. At the very least, encourage the readers to look for the product in the future if they are not going to buy it today.

Make it easy for the readers to take action. Include your company name, address, and phone number in every piece of copy you write.

If you’re writing retail copy, include store hours and locations.

If you’re writing copy for a hotel or tourist attraction, include easy-to-follow instructions on how to get there, along with a clearly drawn map of the area.

If you want the readers to send in an order or write for a free brochure, include a handy coupon they can clip and mail.

If you want the readers to call, highlight your toll-free number in large boldface type. And, if you take credit-card orders, be sure to say so and indicate which cards you accept.

Put order forms in catalogs, reply cards in mailers, dealer lists in industrial sales literature, and response forms at the top of landing pages. Make it easy for your readers to respond.

Offer a Web response option, where the ad hyperlinks to an online form the prospects can use to request more information or place an order.

And, if possible, give the readers an incentive for responding now: a price-off coupon, a time-limited sale, a discount to the first one thousand people who order the product. Don’t be afraid to try for immediate action and sales as well as long-range “image building.” Ask for the order, and ask for it right away.





USE “FALSE LOGIC” TO MAKE THE FACTS SUPPORT YOUR SALES ARGUMENTS


False logic, a term coined by master copywriter Mark Ford, is copy that, through skillful writing, manipulates (but does not lie about or misrepresent) existing facts. The objective: to help readers come to conclusions that these facts, presented without the twists of the copywriter’s pen, might not otherwise support.

A catalog for Harry & David says of its pears, “Not one person in 1,000 has ever tasted them.” The statistic, as presented by the catalog writer, makes the product sound rare and exclusive—and that’s how the average reader interprets it, just as the copywriter intended.

But a logician analyzing this statement might say that it indicates that the pears are not very popular—almost no one buys them.

It’s possible to argue that some false logic borders on deception, but the marketer has to make that call for himself. A metals broker advertised “95 percent of orders shipped from stock” to indicate ready availability. But he ran his business out of an office and had a very small warehouse. How could he claim he shipped from stock?

“We do ship 95 percent of orders from stock,” the marketer explains. “But not from our stock—from the metal supplier’s stock. We are just a broker. But we do not advertise that, since being a broker is perceived as a negative.”

A promotion selling a stock market newsletter to consumers compares the $99 subscription price to the $2,000 the editor would charge if he were managing your money for you, based on a 2 percent fee and a minimum investment of $100,000.

The copy implies that the subscriber is getting Mr. Editor to give him $2,000 worth of money management services for $99, and quickly glosses over the fact that the newsletter is not precisely the same as a managed account.

A similar example is the promotion done by my friend Don Hauptman for American Speaker, a loose-leaf service for executives on how to give good speeches. In his promotion, he points out that this product can help you with your speeches all year long (it has periodic supplements), in contrast to the $5,000 it costs to have a professional speechwriter write just one speech. Of course, American Speaker is not actually writing your speech for you.

There is an ongoing debate over whether people buy for emotional or for logical reasons, but most successful marketers know that the former is more dominant as a buying motive than the latter. It is commonly said, “People buy based on emotion, then rationalize the purchase decision with logic.”

“Only five percent of our thought processes are fully conscious,” writes Dan Hill, president of Sensory Logic. “There’s neurological evidence that we make an emotional response—in effect, a decision—about a product or service within three seconds. So businesses need to make an emotional connection with consumers.”

Because buying decisions are based on strong feelings and ingrained beliefs, marketers should provide justification and support for what the consumer already wants to do. Therefore, as long as the logical argument seems credible and sensible, your readers will accept it. They do not probe into it as scientifically or deeply as would, say, Ralph Nader, Michael Moore, or an investigative reporter for Consumer Reports or the LA Times.

Some critics view direct marketing as a step below general marketing in respectability, ethics, and honesty. And perhaps they might reason that my advocating the use of false logic adds fuel to their argument. But in fact false logic is not just the purview of direct marketers: general marketers use it routinely, some with great success.

McDonald’s advertises “billions sold”1 to promote its hamburgers—leading customers to the false conclusion that just because something is popular, it is necessarily good. Publishers use similar logic when they trumpet a book as “a New York Times best seller.”

Is all this unethical? You can draw your own conclusion, but in my opinion, no.

Copywriters, like lawyers, are advocates for the client (or employer). Just as lawyers use all the arguments at their disposal to win cases, so do copywriters use all the facts at their disposal to win consumers over to the product.

Certainly, we should market no products that are illegal, dangerous, or immoral, although one man’s Victoria’s Secret catalog is another man’s soft porn. But to not use all the tools at our disposal to persuade the buyer is either incompetence, failure to discharge fiduciary duties, or both—and false logic is among the most effective of those tools.





THE UNIQUE SELLING PROPOSITION


Samuel Johnson said, “Promise, large promise, is the soul of an advertisement.”

But how do you make a big promise in your advertising that is powerful enough to convince the consumer to buy your product instead of competing brands?

One way is to develop a compelling USP, or Unique Selling Proposition.

What is a USP? Rosser Reeves, author of Reality in Advertising, coined this term to describe the major advantage of your product over the competition. The idea is this: If your product is no different from or better than other products of the same type, there is no reason for consumers to choose your product over someone else’s. Therefore, to be promoted effectively, your product must have a Unique Selling Proposition: a major benefit that other products in its category don’t offer.

According to Reeves, there are three requirements for a USP (and I am quoting, in the italics, from Reality in Advertising):

1. Each advertisement must make a proposition to the consumer. Each must say, “Buy this product, and you will get this specific benefit.” Your headline must contain a benefit—a promise to the reader.

2. The proposition must be one that the competition either cannot, or does not, offer. Here’s where the unique in Unique Selling Proposition comes in. It is not enough merely to offer a benefit. You must differentiate your product from other, similar products. The USP for M&M’s is that the chocolate is surrounded by a hard candy shell so it won’t melt in your hand.

3. The proposition must be so strong that it can move the mass millions (i.e., pull over new customers to your product). The differentiation cannot be trivial. It must be a difference that matters to the reader.

Why do so many advertisements fail? One reason is that the marketer has not formulated a strong USP for his product and built his advertising upon it. When you start creating advertising without first thinking about what your USP is, your marketing is weak because there is nothing in it to compel the reader to respond. It looks and sounds like everyone else, and what it says isn’t important to the reader.

In general advertising for packaged goods, marketers achieve differentiation by building a strong brand at a cost of millions or even billions of dollars.

Coca-Cola has an advantage because of its brand. If you want a cola, you can get it from a dozen soda makers. But if you want a Coke, you can only get it from Coca-Cola.

Intel has achieved a similar brand dominance, at an extraordinary cost, with its Pentium line of microprocessors.

Most businesses are too small, and have too strong a need to generate an immediate positive return on investment (ROI) from their marketing, to engage in this kind of expensive brand building. So we use other means to achieve the differentiation in our USP.

One popular method is to differentiate your product or service from the competition based on a feature that your product or service has and they don’t.

The common error here is building the USP around a feature that, while different, is unimportant to the prospects, and therefore unlikely to move them to try your product or service.

For example, in the chemical equipment industry, it is common for pump manufacturers to attempt to win customers by advertising a unique design feature. Unfortunately, these design twists often result in no real performance improvement, no real advantage that customers care about.

In a classic industrial ad that ran in the twentieth century, Blackmer Pump, realizing that it could not differentiate based on a technical design principle, took a different approach: to create a USP based upon application of the product.

Blackmer’s trade ads showed an ad ripped out of an industrial buying guide, full of listings for pump manufacturers, including Blackmer. The company name was circled in pen. The headline of the ad read, “There are only certain times you should call Blackmer for a pump. Know when?”

Body copy explained (and I am paraphrasing here), “In many applications, Blackmer performs no better or worse than any pump, so we are not a particularly advantageous choice.”

But, the ad went on, for certain applications (viscous fluids, fluids containing abrasives, slurries, and a few other situations) Blackmer has been proven to outperform all other pumps and is the logical brand of choice. Blackmer closed the ad by offering a free technical manual proving the claim.

My old friend Jim Alexander of Alexander Marketing in Grand Rapids, Michigan, created this campaign and told me it worked extremely well.

The easiest situation in which to create a strong USP is when your product has a unique feature—one that competitors lack—that delivers a strong benefit. This must be an advantage the customer really cares about. Not one that, though a difference, is trivial.

But what if such a proprietary advantage does not exist? What if your product is basically the same as the competition, with no special features?

Reeves has the answer here, too. He said the uniqueness can stem either from a strong brand (already discussed as an option 95 percent of marketers can’t use) or from “a claim not otherwise made in that particular form of advertising”—that is, other products may also have this feature, but advertisers haven’t told consumers about it.

Going back to our example from packaged goods advertising: “M&M’s melt in your mouth, not in your hand.” Once M&M established this claim as its USP, what could the competition do? Run an ad that said, “We also melt in your mouth, not in your hand!”?

To be successful marketers, we must create advertising that generates net revenues in excess of its cost. Reeves believed all advertising had to do this. He defined advertising as “the art of getting a USP into the heads of the most people at the lowest possible cost.” If I were to modify his definition, I would change it to “getting a USP into the heads of the people most likely to buy the product at the lowest possible advertising cost.”

Herb Ahrend, founder of Ahrend Associates, Inc., once said, “A copywriter has to create perceived value. He has to ask, ‘What is the nature of the product? What makes the product different? If it isn’t different, what attribute can you stress that hasn’t been stressed by the competition?’”

Malcolm D. MacDougall, former president and creative director of SSC&B, said there are four ways to advertise seemingly similar products:

1. Stress an underpublicized or little-known benefit. Once a copywriter visited a brewery in the hopes of learning something that could set the brewery’s beer apart from other beers. He was fascinated to discover that beer bottles, like milk containers, are washed in live steam to kill the germs. Although all brands of beer are purified this way, no other manufacturer had stressed this fact. So the copywriter wrote about a beer so pure that the bottles are washed in live steam, and the brew’s Unique Selling Proposition was born.

Study your list of product features and benefits. Then look at the competition’s ads. Is there an important benefit that they have ignored, one you can embrace as the Unique Selling Proposition that sets your product apart from all others?

2. Dramatize and demonstrate a big benefit in a compelling fashion. Flex Tape’s USP is that the tape makes watertight bonds. The company ran a TV commercial in which a metal boat was sawed in half. After taping the two halves together with Flex Tape, the boat was taken out on a lake. And it ran at high speeds without a leak.

3. Dramatize the product name or package. Remember Pez, the candy that came in plastic dispensers made to resemble Mickey Mouse, Pluto, and other cartoon characters? Pez was an ordinary candy, but the package made it special.

In the same way, the most unusual feature of the original L’eggs pantyhose was not its design, fabric, or style but the egg-shaped package it was sold in.

Making your product name or package famous is one sure way to move merchandise off the shelves. But it’s also expensive. Unless your client is a major marketer with a million-dollar budget, this tactic will be tough to pull off.

4. Build long-term brand personalities. Another tactic used by the manufacturers of major national brands is to create advertising that gives their brand a “personality.”

Sarah Jessica Parker’s commercials for Stella Artois beer position it as a sophisticated alternative to a cosmopolitan, martini, or other cocktail.

Similarly, using Jeopardy! host Alex Trebek as a spokesperson for Colonial Penn Life Insurance conveys an image of a financial product that intelligent people would want to have.

If you have millions to spend, you can use advertising to give your product a unique “personality” in the mind of the consumer. But even if your advertising budget is more modest, you can still use features and benefits to create a Unique Selling Proposition that sets your product apart from the rest.





THE SECONDARY PROMISE


Samuel Johnson was right: to break through the clutter and generate a profitable response, marketing must make a big promise. Some examples of big promises from classic promotions:

“Retire overseas on $600 a month.”

“Free money reserved for you.”

“John F. Kennedy had it. So did Princess Diana. Michael Jordan has it now. It’s the reason why millions of people adore them. Look inside to find out what it is and how you can get it.”



Testing shows that, at least in consumer direct marketing, small promises don’t work. To get attention and generate interest, you have to make a large, powerful promise.

But there’s a problem. What happens if the reader is skeptical … because the big promise is so fantastic, it sounds too good to be true? In that case, use a secondary promise.

The secondary promise is a lesser benefit that the product also delivers. Although not as large as the big promise, the secondary promise should be big enough so that, by itself, it is reason enough to order the product—yet small enough so that it is easily believed.

This way, even if readers are totally skeptical about the big promise, they can believe the secondary promise and order on that basis alone.

For instance, an investment promotion had a big promise in its headline: “Crazy as It Sounds, Shares of This Tiny R&D Company, Selling for $2 Today, Could Be Worth as Much as $100 in the Not-Too-Distant Future.”

That’s a really big promise—having a stock go from $2 to $100 is a gain of 4,900 percent. On a thousand shares, your profit would be $98,000.

The problem is, in a bear market, this gain may, to some readers, be too high to be believable. Yet, in this case, it was the truth: if the company’s medical device won FDA approval, a fifty-fold increase in share price was not out of the question.

The solution: a subhead, placed directly under the big promise in the headline, made a secondary promise:

I think this new technology for treating liver disease is going to work. And if it does, the stock price could easily increase 50-fold or more.

But even if it doesn’t … and the company’s treatment is a total failure … the stock could still earn early-stage investors a 500% gain on their shares within the next 24 months.



The catch was this: even if the treatment did not win FDA approval, the company would still make a lot of money (though not as much as with the treatment being approved) using the same technology in a different application. So even if the big promise didn’t pan out, the secondary promise was enough to make the stock worth owning.

There are many techniques you can use to prove your big promise when your reader is skeptical. These include testimonials, case studies, test results, favorable reviews, superior product design, track record, system or methodology, reputation of the manufacturer.

All are good. But the trouble is this: if the big promise is so strong that readers are inclined to dismiss it as false, you find yourself arguing with them and going against their ingrained belief when you introduce all this proof.

I would still present the proof, but an easier way to overcome doubt concerning the big promise is always to accompany it with a secondary promise that is also desirable yet smaller and more credible.

The secondary promise is your “backup” promise. In a package with both a big promise and a secondary promise, the big promise will attract readers because it is so large—and if you offer enough proof, many of those readers will believe it.

What about those prospects who are not convinced? Without a secondary promise, they simply toss your ad or mailing without responding.

But when you add a secondary promise and make it prominent (which means featuring it in the headline or the lead), many of those who reject the big promise as being unbelievable will find the secondary promise credible—and appealing enough to sell them all on its own.

Actually, with a secondary promise, prospects who don’t fully believe your big promise can still be sold by it. They think: “Hey, if this big promise happens to be true, this is a good product to buy; but even if it isn’t true, the product is more than worth the price just for the secondary promise—which I am sure is true—by itself. So either way, I can’t lose.”





KNOW YOUR CUSTOMER


Psychology Today reported on a study designed to uncover the characteristics of successful salespeople.

“The best salespeople first establish a mood of trust and rapport by means of ‘hypnotic pacing’—statements and gestures that play back a customer’s observations, experience, or behavior,” wrote the author of the study. “Pacing is a kind of mirror-like matching, a way of suggesting: ‘I am like you. We are in sync. You can trust me.’”

In other words, successful salespeople empathize with their customers. Instead of launching into a canned sales pitch, the successful salesperson first tries to understand the customer’s needs, mood, personality, and prejudices. By mirroring the customer’s thoughts and feelings in their sales presentations, successful salespeople break down resistance to sales, establish trust and credibility, and highlight only those product benefits that are of interest to the customer.

Copywriters, too, must get to know the customers. Understanding the customers and their motivations for buying the product is the key to writing copy that sells.

Too much advertising is created in a vacuum. The advertiser and the agency write copy based on the product features that catch their fancy, not on the features that are important to the customer. The result is copy that pleases the agency and the advertiser, but leaves the customer cold.

In a survey published in a marketing newsletter, advertising agencies and buyers of high-tech products were asked which product features they considered important. The results showed that advertising agencies stressed features that were not important to buyers. The agencies also omitted information that was vital to the buyers. For example, both purchasing agents and engineers ranked price as the number two consideration when buying high-tech equipment. But the agencies said price was unimportant as a copy point. Agencies said high-tech ads should stress how the product saves the buyer time. But engineers and purchasing agents said this is far less important than product specifications and limitations.

When you write copy, don’t write in a vacuum. Don’t just sit down at the keyboard and pick the features and benefits that suit your fancy. Instead, find out which benefits and features your readers care about—and write about the sales points that will motivate readers to buy the product.

A good example of copy that “hits home” with the reader is a subscription letter I received some years ago from Inc. magazine. Here’s the opening of the letter:

A special invitation to the hero of American business

Dear Entrepreneur:

You’re it!

You’re the kind of person free enterprise is built on. The ambition, vision, and guts of small business people like yourself have always been the driving force behind the American economy.

Unfortunately, that’s a fact which the general business press seems to have forgotten. In their emphasis on everything big, like conglomerates, multinationals, and oil companies the size of countries, most business publications pay very little attention to the little guy.



The letter is effective because it speaks directly to the pride entrepreneurs feel in being “self-made.” The letter writer has done a good job of empathizing with the reader and understanding how an entrepreneur thinks of himself.

You, too, must get to know your reader. One way of doing this is to start paying close attention to your own behavior as a consumer.

Once you start thinking as a consumer rather than a writer, you’ll have more respect for your reader. And you’ll write copy that provides useful product information and sales appeals rather than empty hype.

Another way to understand your prospect is to observe consumers and be an active student of the marketplace. When you’re in the supermarket, watch other buyers. Which type of person picks the sale items and which type goes for the name brand?

When you visit an automobile dealer, observe how the successful salespeople deliver their pitches and handle their customers. Listen to the pitch you receive and think about why it did or didn’t sway you.

Take an active interest in the world of e-commerce. When you are served an ad on Facebook, pay attention to subject matter, offer, and design.

And talk to the businesspeople you trade with—store owners, the plumber, your lawyer, the gardener, the person who repairs your hot-water heater—to find out the techniques they use to promote their services and products. People who are close to their customers—and many small business people are—know more about the reality of selling than most ad agency account executives or corporate brand managers do. Listen to these people, and you’ll learn what makes the customer tick. (Chapter 5 provides additional tips on getting to know your reader.)

There’s an old saying: “You can’t be all things to all people.” And it certainly applies to advertising and selling. You can’t create one ad or commercial that appeals to everybody, because different groups of buyers have different needs. So, as a copywriter, you must first identify your audience—the segment of the market you are selling to—and then learn which product benefits interest these buyers.

Tailor both the content and the presentation of your information to the group of customers you’re selling to. Take frozen foods as an example. When you sell frozen foods to a dad or mom who does the cooking, he or she is most interested in nutrition and price.

But a young, single professional person is primarily interested in convenience: he or she doesn’t want to spend too much time in the kitchen. Price is not as much of a factor because the young professional has more disposable income than the homemaker.

Take photocopiers as another example. The large corporation buying a copier wants a machine that is fast and offers a variety of features such as color copies, collating, and two-sided copying. But the self-employed professional who works at home has different needs. His budget is limited, so the copier must be inexpensive. And, since he’s working from home, space is at a premium, so compactness is an important feature. But speed and capacity are not as crucial, since the work-at-home professional makes fewer copies than the corporate user.

Sometimes, the benefits to stress to various groups of buyers are obvious. In other cases, you must ask the advertiser or his customers which features should be stressed. I once had the assignment of selling a water purification system to two different types of customers: marine users (mostly commercial fishing vessels) and chemical industry users (chemical plants). Same product, two different buyers.

By talking with a few customers in each group, I discovered that marine users put a premium on reliable operation, since they can’t afford to be without fresh water while at sea. Weight is also important, because the larger the equipment, the more fuel the boat consumes in hauling the equipment around.

Chemical industry buyers, on the other hand, don’t care about weight, because the machine is placed on the plant floor. And, because they have many sources of water, reliability is not as crucial. The chemical industry buyers—all engineers by training—were more interested in technical features. They wanted to know every product specification down to the last nut, bolt, pump, and pipeline. I wouldn’t have known these differences existed unless I asked. Which is why it’s vital that you get to know your buyer.

But how well do you really know your customers? Knowing that you are writing to farmers, information technology (IT) professionals, or plumbers is just the start. You have to dig deeper. But how?

To write powerful copy, you have to go beyond the demographics to understand what really motivates these people: who they are, what they want, how they feel, and what their biggest problems and concerns are that your product can help solve. Your copy should reach prospects on three levels: intellectual, emotional, and personal.

Intellectual is the first level and, while effective, not as strong as the other two. An intellectual appeal is based on logic, for example, “Buy the stocks we recommend in our investment newsletter and you will beat the market by 50 to 100 percent.”

More powerful is to reach the prospect on an emotional level. Emotions that can be tapped include fear, greed, love, vanity, and, for fund-raising, benevolence. Going back to our example of a stock market newsletter, the emotional appeal might be, “Our advice can help you cut your losses and make much more money, so you become much wealthier than your friends and neighbors. You’ll be able to pay cash for your next car—a Lexus, BMW, or any luxury automobile you care to own—and you’ll sleep better at night.”

The most powerful way you can reach people is on a personal level. Again, from our example of a stock market newsletter: “Did you lose a small fortune in the 2008 stock market crash? So much that it put your dreams of retirement or financial independence on hold? Now you can gain back everything you lost, rebuild your net worth, and make your goal of early retirement or financial independence come true. A lot sooner than you think.”





THE BDF FORMULA


To reach your prospects on all three levels—intellectual, emotional, and personal—you must understand what copywriter Mark Ford calls the buyer’s “Core Complex.” These are the emotions, attitudes, and aspirations that drive them, as represented by the BDF formula, which stands for beliefs, desires, and feelings.

•  Beliefs. What does your audience believe? What is their attitude toward your product and the problems or issues it addresses?

•  Desires. What do they want? What are their goals? What change do they want in their lives that your product can help them achieve?

•  Feelings. How do they feel? Are they confident and brash? Nervous and fearful? What do they feel about the major issues in their lives, businesses, or industries?

For instance, a marketing team did this exercise using IT people, for a company that gives seminars in communication and interpersonal skills for IT professionals. Here’s what they came up with in a group meeting:

•  Beliefs. IT people think they are smarter than other people, technology is the most important thing in the world, users are stupid, and management doesn’t appreciate them enough.

•  Desires. IT people want to be appreciated and recognized. They also prefer to deal with computers and avoid people whenever possible. And they want bigger budgets.

•  Feelings. IT people often have an adversarial relationship with management and users, both of whom they service. They feel that others dislike them, look down upon them, and do not understand what they do.

Based on this analysis, particularly the feelings, the company created a direct-mail letter that was its most successful ever to promote a seminar, “Interpersonal Skills for IT Professionals.” The rather unusual headline: “Important news for any IT professional who has ever felt like telling an end user, ‘Go to hell.’”

Before writing copy, write out in narrative form the BDF of your target market. Share these with your team and come to an agreement on them. Then write copy based on the agreed-upon BDF.

Occasionally insights into the prospect’s desires and concerns can be gleaned through formal market research. For instance, a copywriter working on a cooking oil account was reading a focus group transcript and came across this comment from a user: “I fried chicken in the oil and then poured the oil back into a measuring cup. All the oil was there except one teaspoon.”

This comment, buried in the appendix of a focus group report, became the basis of a successful TV campaign dramatizing the selling point that food did not absorb the oil and therefore was not greasy when cooked in it.

Veteran adman Joe Sacco once had an assignment to write a campaign for a new needle used by diabetics to inject insulin. What was the key selling point?

The diabetics Sacco talked to all praised the needle because it was sharp. A nonuser would probably view being sharp as a negative. But if you have ever given yourself or anyone else an injection, you know that sharper needles go in more smoothly, with minimal discomfort. Sacco wrote a successful ad campaign based on the claim that these needles were sharp, therefore enabling easier, pain-free insulin injections.

Copywriter Don Hauptman advises, “Start with the prospect, not the product.” With BDF, you can quickly gain a deeper understanding of your prospects before you attempt to sell them something. Stronger marketing campaigns usually follow.





A CHECKLIST OF “COPY MOTIVATORS”


As I’ve pointed out, different people buy products for different reasons. If I buy a car, I buy reliable transportation to get me where I want to go, and a used economy car suits me just fine. But the buyer of a Porsche or Mercedes-Benz is buying more than transportation—she’s buying status and prestige as well.

Before you write your copy, it’s a good idea to review the reasons why people might want to buy your product. To help you, I’ve compiled the following checklist of “copy motivators”: twenty-two motivations people have for making purchases. This list is not comprehensive. But it will get you thinking about who you’re writing to and why you’re writing to them.

Here, then, are twenty-two reasons why people might buy your product. Don’t just read the list; think about each of the reasons and how it might apply to the products you handle.

To be liked

To be appreciated

To be right

To feel important

To make money

To save money

To save time

To make work easier

To be secure

To be attractive

To be sexy

To be comfortable

To be distinctive

To be happy

To have fun

To gain knowledge

To be healthy

To gratify curiosity

For convenience

Out of fear

Out of greed

Out of guilt



Think about the things you buy—and why you buy them.

You buy cologne to smell nice. And you want to smell nice to attract a mate.

You buy sports equipment to have fun. You join a spa to become healthy. You buy a gold-plated money clip to be distinctive and feel important.

You buy insurance to be secure. You buy slippers to be comfortable. You buy a refrigerator with an ice maker for convenience.

Once you understand what makes people buy things, you know how to sell—and how to write copy. The rest is just organization and good editing and a few simple techniques.





LONG COPY VS. SHORT COPY


The slogan from an old cigarette commercial was, “It’s not how long you make it; it’s how you make it long.” And that’s a good rule of thumb for determining the length of the copy you write.

In other words, the question isn’t how many words you should write; it’s how much information to include for the copy to accomplish its sales mission.

In general, the length will depend upon three things: the product, the audience, and the purpose of the copy. First, consider your product. Is there a lot you can say about it? And will giving these facts help convince the reader to buy it?

Some products have a lot of features and benefits you can highlight in your copy. These include computers, Bluetooth speakers, cars, books, insurance policies, investment opportun