d are trusted more than items that are obvious ads.

To get prospects for the product to notice your ad, state in the headline either who the reader is (e.g., “prescription drug users”) or what their problem is (e.g., “wet basement”).

Sales appeals that work in classified mail-order advertising include promises that the customer will obtain love, money, health, popularity, success, leisure, security, self-confidence, better appearance, self-improvement, pride of accomplishment, prestige, pride of ownership, or comfort; will receive entertainment; will save time; will eliminate worry and fear; will satisfy curiosity, self-expression, or creativity; or will avoid work or risk.

Effective words and phrases to use in your small ads include: free, new, amazing, now, how to, easy, discover, method, plan, reveals, show, simple, startling, advanced, improved, and you.

In a full-page ad, the advertisement is the only thing the readers see on that ad. So they are not distracted by any other ads on the page.

But when you run a half-page ad, there are many other ads competing for attention. Again, proven effective techniques for attracting your target prospects to your ad include identifying the ideal reader in the headline (e.g., “heart patients”) or the problem the prospects want to alleviate (e.g., “memory loss”).





WRITING CLASSIFIED AND TINY DISPLAY ADS


I urge you to test some classified and one- or two-inch display ads. Yes, they are small and seem almost insignificant. But they also cost little to run and test. Therefore, they can produce a profitable ROI. And classified ads that make money can be run for long periods and tested in multiple publications.

One of my most successful mail-order ads, which ran continuously for many years in Writer’s Digest, reads as follows:

MAKE $100,000/YEAR writing ads, brochures, promotional material for local/national client. Free details: CTC, 22 E. Quackenbush, Dept. WD, Dumont, NJ 07628.



Here are some other examples of how to write classified mail-order ads:

EXTRA CASH. 12 ways to make money at home. Free details …

MAIL-ORDER MILLIONAIRE reveals moneymaking secrets. FREE 1-hour cassette …

SELL NEW BOOK by mail! 400% profit! Free dealer information …

GROW earthworms at home for profit …

CARNIVOROUS AND WOODLAND terrarium plants. Send for FREE catalog.

ANCESTOR HUNTING? Trace your family roots the easy way. Details free …



The measure of a successful classified ad is the cost per inquiry. Therefore, if you can get your message across in fewer words, you pay less for the ad and, as a result, lower your cost per inquiry.

Make your classifieds as short and pithy as possible. Here are some tips for reducing your word count:

•  Be concise. Use the minimum number of words needed to communicate your idea. For example, instead of “Earn $500 a Day in Your Own Home-Based Business,” write “Work at Home—$500/Day!”

•  Minimize your address. You pay the publication for every word in your classified, including your address. Therefore, instead of “22 E. Quackenbush Avenue,” I write “22 E. Quackenbush.” The mail will still be delivered, and I will save one word. This can add up to significant savings for ads run frequently in multiple publications.

•  Use phrases and sentence fragments rather than full sentences.

•  Remember your objective. You are asking only for an inquiry, not for an order. You don’t need a lot of copy, since all you are asking the reader to do is send for free information.

•  Use combination words, hyphenated words, and slash constructions. For instance, instead of “GROW EARTH WORMS,” which is three words, write “GROW EARTHWORMS,” which counts as two words, saving you a word.

In classified ads, the best way to generate a response is to ask for an inquiry rather than an order. This is done by putting a phrase such as “free details,” “free information,” “free catalog,” or similar phrase, followed by a colon and your address (e.g., Free Details: Box 54, Canuga, TN 44566).

Should you charge for your information? Some advertisers ask the prospect to pay for the information either by sending a small amount of money (25¢, 50¢, $1, and $2 are typical) or by sending a self-addressed envelope with the postage already on it.

The theory is that asking for postage or a nominal payment brings you a more qualified lead and therefore results in a higher percentage of leads converted to sales.

My experience is that it doesn’t pay to charge for your information kit, because doing so dramatically cuts down on the number of leads you will receive.

Whenever you offer information to generate an inquiry, I believe it’s best to make it free. The exception might be if you are offering a very expensive and elaborate catalog, for which you charge $1 or $2 to cover your costs.

In your classified ads, put a key code in the address, so when you get inquiries, you can track which ad generated them. For instance, in my ad “MAKE $100,000/YEAR WRITING,” the key code “WD” refers to Writer’s Digest magazine. Since the ad runs every month, I don’t bother adding a code number to track the month. If you wanted to do so, you could. For example, “Dept. WD-10” would mean Writer’s Digest magazine, October issue (the tenth month of the year). Keep track of the key code on each inquiry, and record the information in a notebook or spreadsheet to measure ad response.

We have already discussed the two key measurements of two-step classified advertising: the cost per inquiry and the percentage of inquiries converted to orders. The bottom line is this: Did the sales the ad generated exceed the cost of the ad space? If they did, it was profitable. If they didn’t, the ad isn’t working, and a new ad should be tested.

Place your classified ads in publications that have mail-order classified ad sections. Contact the magazines that interest you and ask for their media kits, which include details on circulation, advertising rates, and readership, and a sample issue of the publication. Ask if the publisher will send several sample issues.

Look at the classified ad sections in the publications. Are the ads for products similar to yours? If so, that’s a good sign. See if these ads repeat from issue to issue. The advertisers would not repeat them unless the ads were working. If this publication is working for their offers, it can work for yours, too.

Classified ad sections are divided by various headings. Place your ad under the appropriate heading. If you don’t see an appropriate heading, call the magazine and ask if it will create one for you.

If you sell information by mail, avoid putting your classified under the heading “Books and Booklets.” This will reduce orders. Instead, put the ad under a heading related to the subject matter. For example, if you are selling a book on how to make money cleaning chimneys, place the ad under “Business Opportunities.”

You can test a classified or small display ad by running it just one time in a publication. The problem is, most magazines, and even weekly newspapers, have long lead times—several weeks or more—for placing ads. If you place the ad to run one time only and the ad pulls well, you then must wait several weeks or months until you can get it in the publication again.

In a weekly newspaper or magazine, I test a classified ad by running it for one month—four consecutive issues. For a monthly publication, I test it for three months—three consecutive issues. If the first insertion is profitable, I will probably extend the insertion order for several months so the ad runs continuously with no interruption.

With a full-page ad, you usually get the greatest number of orders the first time the ad runs in the magazine. Response declines with each additional insertion; at the point where the ad is not going to be profitable in its next insertion, you pull it and try another ad.

The reason for this response pattern is that the first time the ad runs, it skims the cream of the prospects, getting orders from those most likely to buy. Those who buy from the first insertion of the ad will not buy when it runs again. Therefore, each time the ad runs it reaches a smaller and smaller audience of potential new buyers.

While response to full-page ads declines with each insertion, the response to either a fractional ad or a classified ad can remain steady for many insertions. Indeed, some mail-order operators (and I am one of them) have run the same classified ad monthly in the same magazine for years at a time, with no decline in response.

Response sometimes increases during the first twelve months the ad is run, as people see the ad over and over again and eventually become curious enough to respond. Some people who responded once, received your sales literature, and didn’t buy may respond several times, and get your literature several times, before they eventually break down and buy. Also, keep in mind that each issue reaches a number of new subscribers via subscriptions and newsstand circulation, so the total audience for a classified remains fairly constant.





RESPONSE MECHANISMS


You should always tell the interested prospect what the next stop is and give instructions on how to take action along with a reason to do so. Some of the more popular response options include:

Toll-free number.

Standard postal mail.

Business reply mail.

E-mail.

Web form.

Chatbot.

Quick response code (fig. 6.1).

Visit to store or showroom.

Visit from salesperson to consumer’s home.

Text.



Pick the response option that works best for your offer as your primary response mechanism. But also offer one or two alternatives, as different people respond in different ways (e.g., some do not text).

Fig. 6.1: Quick Response Code (QRC). The prospect scans the graphic with her smartphone and is immediately taken to a Web page featuring your offer or whatever else you wish to show her.





7



WRITING DIRECT MAIL



According to the Data and Marketing Association (DMA), the amount of money spent on direct mail in 2018 was $38.5 billion.1 Today, more than 120 billion pieces of direct mail pass through the post office each year.2

There are a number of factors that account for direct mail’s popularity as an advertising medium.

First, you can measure the results by counting how many order forms or reply cards come back. With print ads and broadcast commercials you don’t always know how effective your efforts have been. But direct-mail advertisers always know whether a mailing is profitable or not.

Second, direct mail frequently generates a higher ROI than other media. The copywriter for a small chain of furniture stores notes that direct mail draws more people to the stores than newspaper ads, TV commercials, even digital marketing. He says: “People walking into the store with the direct-mail piece, along with the burst in sales when they go out, makes it clear that they read direct mail and it works extremely well.”

In its loyalty program, when Nordstrom stopped sending reward notes to customers via postal mail, the retailer saw a reduction in foot traffic in all of its stores.3

Third, direct mail can be targeted to select groups of prospects through the careful selection of the proper mailing lists. The copy for each mailing can be tailored to the needs of the various groups of prospects you want to reach. And you can send as few—or as many—mailing pieces as your budget allows. Which makes direct mail cost-effective for both big corporations and smaller advertisers.

Fourth, direct mail gives you great flexibility in your presentation. Print advertising is limited by the size of the page, broadcast by the length of the commercial. Direct-mail writers can use as many words and pictures as it takes to make the sale. (I recently received a direct-mail piece that featured a sixteen-page sales letter!) Your mailing can even include a sample of the product or a gift for the reader.

Because of these advantages, many advertisers use direct mail for a wide variety of applications:

To sell products by mail

To generate sales leads

To answer product inquiries

To distribute catalogs, newsletters, and other sales literature

To motivate the sales force

To keep in touch with former customers

To get more business from current customers

To follow up inquiries

To tie in with other media such as telemarketing, print advertising, and broadcast (Publishers Clearing House, for example, used to run TV commercials alerting consumers to look for the Clearing House sweepstakes offer in the mail)

To invite prospects to attend seminars, conferences, hospitality suites, and trade show exhibits

To renew subscriptions, memberships, service contracts, and insurance policies

To get customers to come to the store

To distribute information, news, product samples

To conduct research surveys

To build goodwill

To announce a sale



Fifth, contrary to what you might think, direct-mail response rates are on the rise, having increased on average 14 percent since 2008. During that same period, e-mail response rates declined by a hefty 57 percent.4





A PERSONAL MEDIUM


The main difference between direct mail and space advertising is that mail is a personal medium. A letter is a one-to-one communication from one human being to another. An ad appearing in a magazine will be seen by thousands or millions of other readers. But a letter is for your eyes only.

Now, it’s true that most direct mail is mass-produced and distributed in bulk mailings to thousands of prospects. Still, the reader views mail as more personal than a magazine or newspaper. The trick is to take advantage of this—by creating direct mail that captures the best characteristics of personal mail.

Unlike an ad, a sales letter is signed. So the writer can use the first person—“I” writing to “you,” the reader—to personalize the sale message.

The tone of the letter should also be personal. Successful direct-mail writers favor an informal, conversational style. They use contractions, colloquial language, and short, snappy sentences. Their letters brim with personality, enthusiasm, warmth, and sincerity.

Unlike print advertising, which many newbie copywriters have limited experience with, direct mail should come easy; we all have experience in letter writing. But too many direct-mail letters sound like … well, like advertising. When you write direct mail, don’t suppress your natural style. Let the words flow in your own voice. Write the direct-mail letter as if you were writing a letter to a friend.

Direct mail is almost always a response-oriented medium. It asks for the order (or at least for some type of action) now, not in a day or a week or a month. Direct-mail writers need to generate an immediate response from the reader. This is why most direct-mail packages include an order form, a reply envelope, and copy that tells you to “act now—don’t delay—send in your order TODAY!”

As I mentioned, you have great flexibility in the elements you include in your mailing package. As the copywriter, you decide. Should the package contain a letter? A brochure? An order form? A reply card? A sample? A second letter? A second or third brochure?

The “classic” direct-mail package contains an outer envelope, a letter, a brochure, and a reply card. But knowledgeable direct-mail writers vary this format to suit their objectives. Of course, there’s always the option of using a completely different format, such as a self-mailer or an invoice stuffer.

The heart of the package is the sales letter. Most of the selling is done in the letter; the brochure is used to highlight sales points, illustrate the product, and provide technical information not appropriate to a letter. There’s an old saying among direct-mail writers: “The letter sells; the brochure tells.”





SALES LETTER MECHANICS


It’s easy to begin an ad, because they all follow the same format: headline first, visual that illustrates the headline, and lead paragraph that expands on the headline.

But the writer has more options with the start of a sales letter.

First, there’s the choice of whether to personalize the letter with the individual recipient’s name and address, or send out a form letter.

To personalize, you use a computer to generate customized letters for each person on the mailing list, and that can be expensive. Personalized letters generally get a better response, as long as they look personally typed and sound personal in tone. Don’t overdo it by repeating the person’s name over and over in the letter (“so, MR. RAYMOND, we have reserved this special offer for you and the whole RAYMOND family…”). This technique sounds insincere; you wouldn’t use the person’s name that often if you were speaking face-to-face.

Also, avoid the old-fashioned “ink jet” printing systems that produce letters in which the name is obviously inserted into a form letter. The letter should look as if it were typed by hand; you can achieve this effect with a laser printer.

In many assignments, economy will require that you use preprinted letters. Some advertisers print form letters and then type in each prospect’s name and address (this is the “match and fill” technique). But match and fill is time-consuming, and mailing tests show that match-and-fill letters often don’t pull any better than form letters with headlines running across the top.

There are exceptions. It pays to personalize sales letters going to existing customers, and also when writing to high-level executives. The bigger the corporation and the higher up the corporate ladder the recipient, the more likely personalization is to pay off.

Set the letter headline in large, bold typeface, such as 16-point Arial Black. You can place the headline above the salutation, and as an option, you can center the headline and put it in a box to call attention to it. Such a box is called a Johnson Box.

In some letters, you may decide against a headline and simply start with the salutation: Dear Friend, Dear Reader, Dear Business Executive, Dear Friend of the Smithsonian Institute.

A salutation that identifies with the reader’s special interest—Dear Farmer, Dear Lawyer, Dear Computer Enthusiast, Dear Future Millionaire—is always better than Dear Sir, Dear Madame, or Dear Friend.

Sometimes you will use a salutation only. Sometimes, a salutation and a headline. In some cases, a headline without a salutation may be more appropriate.





15 WAYS TO START YOUR SALES LETTER


The first sentence of your letter is the most important one. This sentence signals whether there is something of interest in your letter or whether it is worthless junk mail to be thrown away without a second glance. The lead must hook the reader’s attention, but it must also entice him to read further.

Over the years, letter writers have found that there are certain types of openings that are more effective in direct mail than other types. Here are samples of fifteen of those leads. When you’re struggling with your first letters, turn to these examples for possible ideas on how to structure your own opening.





1. State the Offer


The offer consists of the product for sale, its price, the terms of the sale (including discounts), and the guarantee.

If your offer is particularly attractive, you may make the offer—and not the product or its benefits—the theme of the letter. Here’s how the International Preview Society featured a free ten-day trial offer in a sales letter selling Beethoven CDs:

Yours FREE for 10 days—

the legendary music of Beethoven—

Nine Symphonies that epitomize the

beauty and harmony denied him in life.

Plus FREE Preview bonus.

Dear Music Lover,

Beethoven. The name alone calls to mind some of the greatest music of the ages …



The letter writer figured that the reader already appreciated Beethoven, so there was no need to sell her on Beethoven’s symphonies. And it’s hard to sell one set of classical recordings over another based on the orchestra or conductor or the quality of the performance. So the copywriter concentrated on the offer—a free trial plus a free bonus CD—just for accepting the trial offer.

The headline was typed with an ordinary typewriter font and positioned where the reader’s name and address would normally appear in a personal letter.





2. Highlight the Free Literature


Letters that seek to generate inquiries from potential customers usually offer the reader a free brochure, booklet, catalog, or other piece of sales literature. You can increase response by stressing the offer of free literature, and by centering the sales pitch on the benefits of the literature rather than those of the product or service.

Here’s an example from a letter sent to me by the Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York:

Dear Friend:

We have reserved for you a free copy of Prentice Hall’s TAX-SAVING STRATEGIES, a helpful book for Corporate Executives and Professionals. It contains practical, timely, and useful ways for you to maximize the value of your deductions and save dollars.





3. Make an Announcement


If you have something new to announce—a special offer, a new product, a new club, a one-of-a-kind event—start your letter with this important news, as in this letter from Calhoun’s Collectors Society:

In the world of U.S. stamps, there is only one name older than that of the Federal Bureau of Engraving and Printing itself. The revered house of Scott—known since 1863 as the ultimate authority on American philately.

Now, for the first time ever, Scott’s stamp experts have selected the subjects to be commemorated in a limited philatelic edition that is unprecedented in collecting annals.





4. Tell a Story


Copy written in story format has great reader appeal. First, it creates empathy with the reader. By telling a story that relates to the reader’s own situation, you build a bridge between the reader’s needs and your sales pitch. Second, people are familiar with stories and enjoy reading them. The news they get from newspapers, magazines, and television is related to them in narrative form. Stories hold their interest and get them to read letters they might otherwise put aside.

A subscription letter for Inc. magazine begins with the story of a man who quit his job to become an entrepreneur—a move many of us with corporate positions may daydream of now and then.

Dear Executive,

Three years ago this month, a man I know—he was then a vice president of a big corporation in Illinois—walked into his boss’s office and handed in his resignation.

Two weeks later, he started his own company.

The man had everything going for him. He was smart, he was energetic, he was dedicated, and he knew his particular field inside out.

Almost from the start, the new company caught on. It grew quickly, adding new customers, new employees, new equipment.

But then, about a year ago, the picture began to change. Orders were still coming in, but the company was stumbling. Things went steadily from bad to worse until …

A week ago Friday, that man—who had started out on his own with such high hopes just three years before—was forced to go out of business. His company closed its doors for good.

What happened? What went wrong? Could it have been avoided? How?…



This story holds our attention because it could happen to us someday. We want to know what went wrong and how Inc. magazine can help us avoid the same mistakes.





5. Flatter the Reader


One reason many people take a negative view toward direct mail is that they know it isn’t really personal. They know they are just one of thousands of people whose names the advertiser obtained from a mailing list.

But you can turn this fact to your advantage by using flattery. Tell the reader, “Yes, I got your name from a list. Yes, you’re part of that group. But that group is special; the people in it have superior characteristics that set them apart from the crowd. And you’re superior, too. That’s why I’m writing to you.”

There is flattery in the opening of a letter from the Maserati Import Company, a seller of luxury automobiles:

Dear Mr. McCoy:

One of a kind. Is that phrase a little trite?

I used to think so until I tried to find you.

Now I know what “one of a kind” really means.

The process of finding your name and address was the advertising equivalent of panning for gold.…



The letter goes on to offer the reader a free bottle of French champagne if he will test-drive a Maserati luxury sedan.





6. Write to the Reader Peer-to-Peer


The logic here is that people in special-interest groups—and most direct mail is aimed at narrow groups of prospects—will be more receptive to a sales pitch from a peer than from an outsider.

So a letter aimed at farmers should be signed by a farmer. And it should be written in the plain, straightforward language of one farmer talking to another.

With this approach, the writer can achieve empathy with the reader by saying, “Look … I am like you. I know your problems. I’ve been through them myself. And I’ve found a solution. You can trust me.”

In a subscription letter for Writer’s Digest, the pitch is made by one writer talking to other writers:

Dear Writer:

I don’t have the great American novel in me.

I flunked Poetry 102 in college. My first, last, and only short story was rejected by 14 magazines.…





7. A Personal Message from the President


In direct mail, the owner or manager of a business can talk directly with his or her customers.

Customers like dealing with the person in charge. When the top person in your company signs the letter, it makes the reader feel important. And having the owner’s signature on the advertising adds a bit more credibility to the message. (I’ve often heard people say of such mail, “Well, he wouldn’t sign it if it wasn’t true.”)

FutureSoft begins a mailer on its Quickpro software package with a letter from the company president:

Personal Message to Microcomputer Owners from Joseph W. Tamargo, President of FUTURESOFT …

I want to tell you why I have chosen to send you an actual condensation of the Operating Instructions of our exciting and unique QUICKPRO, which writes programs for you.



Another example, this one from John L. Blair, president of the New Process Company, a mail-order clothing manufacturer:

Dear Mr. Bly:

A memo recently crossed my desk that said I would have to RAISE MY PRICES—NOW—to offset our spiraling operating costs!

But I said, “NO! NOT YET!”

I know that customers like you, Mr. Bly, expect the BEST VALUE for their money when they shop at NPC. And that’s why I’m going to hold the line on higher prices just as long as I possibly can!…





8. Use a Provocative Quote


The quote should contain news or a startling statistic or fact, or say something outrageous. The quote must be like the lead of a news story—it must raise a question or arouse curiosity to make the reader want to read the body of the letter to find out more.

In a letter selling a book on advertising, Prentice Hall began with a quotation taken directly from the book itself:

Advertising agencies and other consultants score something on the order of a 9 on my Least-Needed scale of 1-to-10.…

This is what Lewis Kornfeld has to say, based on his extraordinary success as Radio Shack’s master marketer for over 30 years.





9. Ask a Question


Question leads are effective when the answer to the question is interesting or important to the reader, or when the question arouses genuine curiosity.

Here are a few examples of letters that lead with a question:

Dear Friend,

What do you think when you see a letter that starts with “Dear Friend” … a letter from someone you’ve never met?

WHAT DO JAPANESE MANAGERS HAVE THAT AMERICAN MANAGERS SOMETIMES LACK?

Dear Mr. Blake:

Is freelance a dirty word to you? It really shouldn’t be …





10. Make It Personal


The most personal direct-mail piece I ever received began as follows:

Dear Friend,

As you may already know, we have been doing some work for people who have the same last name as you do. Finally, after months of work, THE AMAZING STORY OF THE BLYS IN AMERICA is ready for print and you are in it!



This letter is highly personal for two reasons. First, my name appears several times in the body of the letter. Second, the product is designed especially for me, a Bly. (But the letter is weakened by the stock opening “Dear Friend.” A better salutation is the more personal “Dear Friend Bly.”)

Personalized mail usually gets more attention than form letters. So whenever possible, make it personal. Insert the reader’s name in the copy once or twice (if your budget allows for computer letters). And, more important, make sure the copy speaks to the needs, interests, and ego of the reader (as a book called The Amazing Story of the Blys in America has strong appeal to people named Bly).





11. Identify the Reader’s Problem


If your product or service solves a problem, you can create a strong sales letter by featuring the problem in the lead, then telling how the product or service solves the problem.

There are two advantages to this technique. First, it selects a specific group of readers for your letter. (Only single people will respond to a letter that begins, “Are You Sick and Tired of Paying Extra Taxes Just Because You Aren’t Married?”)

Second, the format shows in a clear and direct manner how the product solves the reader’s problem. When you start with the problem, the natural next step is to talk about the solution.

Manhattan dentist Dr. Brian E. Weiss used this technique in a letter inviting me in for an appointment:

Dear Mr. Bly:

You know how difficult it is to look your best if dental problems are causing discomfort and pain or if the appearance of your teeth needs improvement.

Have you been putting off a dental checkup or consultation on an existing problem? This note may encourage you to take the important step to help yourself feel better by making a dental appointment.…



Politician Jim Thompson used the technique in a campaign letter aimed at voters in Chicago:

Dear Mrs. Vanderbilt:

If you can’t afford higher taxes.

If you’re afraid to walk the streets at night.

If you’re sick and tired of corrupt government officials.

If your children aren’t getting the education they deserve.

Then you don’t need a Governor appointed by Chicago’s City Hall.…





12. Stress a Benefit


A straightforward presentation of a benefit can outpull other techniques if the benefit is significant and has strong appeal to the reader.

A sales letter from Prentice Hall offering a new book on advertising began with the headline, “Just published … HOW TO MAKE YOUR ADVERTISING MAKE MONEY. A clear, concise guide to effective advertising…” The headline is effective because it’s safe to assume that all advertising professionals who receive the letter want to create more effective advertising.

To get results, a benefit-oriented headline must appeal to the reader’s self-interest. As Cahners Publishing points out in its booklet, “How to Create and Produce Successful Direct Mail,” “Don’t tell your prospect about your grass seed, tell him about his lawn.”





13. Use Human Interest


People enjoy reading about other people, especially about people who have anxieties, fears, problems, and interests similar to their own.

Some of the strongest sales letters center around powerful, dramatic human interest stories. The readers get hooked because the events in the story relate somehow to their own lives. And the letter leaves more of an impression because it deals with human emotions, not just technical product features or abstract sales arguments.

The publisher of Cardiac Alert newsletter used an autobiographical approach to add human interest to a sales letter asking for subscriptions to his publication. The headline read:

When I was 16, my father died of a heart attack …



You can’t help but be interested in the letter that follows.





14. Let the Reader In on Some Inside Information


When a consumer sees your ad in a magazine, he knows he is sharing your message with tens of thousands of other people. But he has no way of knowing whether you’ve sent the sales letter he received to thousands of prospects, or just a select few.

Direct mail is an excellent medium for appealing to the reader’s need to feel special, important, exclusive. And nothing is more exclusive than revealing some inside information on a sale or product that others don’t know about.

Here’s exclusive news from a cover letter mailed along with a reprint of a magazine ad:

Here’s a fresh-from-the-printer reprint of our latest WALL STREET JOURNAL ad …

We’ll be running the ad in June because we want potential customers to know more about our latest financial planning services.

But, as someone we’ve done business with before, we consider YOU even more important than the “new business” out there.

Which is why we’re sending you our new ad months before it will break in the press.

You see, we wanted you to be the first to know about our new services which can save you time and build your retirement nest egg.



The message is: we’re telling you first because we think you’re special.

And what reader of direct mail doesn’t think he or she is special?





15. Sweepstakes


A sweepstakes can greatly increase the response to a direct-mail campaign. One sweepstakes mailing I received began:

American Family Publishers Announces America’s First By-Mail GUARANTEED MULTIMILLION-DOLLAR SWEEPSTAKES OFFER: R BLY, A LOCAL NY RESIDENT, MAY HAVE ALREADY WON ONE MILLION DOLLARS.



There are three ways of structuring a sweepstakes:

YOU MAY WIN …

YOU MAY HAVE WON …

YOU HAVE WON …

The “you have won” sweepstakes generates the most entries because the consumer is guaranteed a prize. This sweepstakes is expensive to run because you must award the consolation prize to everyone who claims it.

The “you may have won” is the second most effective sweepstakes. Here the reader is told that the winning entry number has been preselected by computer—and that you just may hold that winning entry number in your hand.

Sweepstakes mailings have declined dramatically over the past few decades. However, I am beginning to notice a slight uptick in sweepstakes promotions again.

These are fifteen common ways of starting your sales letter. There are others. Read the direct mail you receive and keep a file of effective direct-mail leads and letters to use as a reference in your own work.

Marketing tactics are often cyclical. Reason: When too many marketers use a tactic, it becomes less special and more commonplace. So the market is flooded with look-alike promotions using the tactic, and with all the noise it becomes less effective.

When the marketing tactic becomes less effective, marketers abandon it in droves. Soon, it is scarce rather than overused. And when that happens, some smart marketers begin using it again, and find that it is once again working.





SHOULD YOU USE AN ENVELOPE TEASER?


The outer envelope is the first thing the reader sees when receiving your mailing package. It is here that the selling starts. If the outer envelope fails to entice the reader to open the letter or, worse, if it prompts him to throw the letter away, the brilliant copy of your sales letter will be wasted.

There are two basic approaches to outer envelopes. The first is to start your sales pitch right away with headlines and copy printed on the outer envelope. This copy, known as “teaser copy,” is designed to entice the reader to open the envelope by arousing curiosity or promising a strong reward for reading the package.

The problem with this strategy is that teasers are labels that instantly identify the package as containing advertising matter. Large headlines and copy lines printed on an envelope shout at the reader, “This is advertising … it’s worthless … throw it away!”

My rule is: use a teaser only if it contains an irresistible message that will compel the reader to open the envelope. But don’t feel you must use a teaser; a weak teaser can actually reduce response versus a package with a plain envelope!

We know that people always open their personal mail before they open direct mail. We also know that many people throw away every “teaser” envelope they receive without a second glance.

Teasers are effective only when the message is compelling. For example, I’d have a hard time ignoring an envelope with the teaser, “Inside: The Secret to Living Longer and Feeling Better … Without Dieting or Special Exercise.”

On the other hand, you’d probably save yourself the trouble of opening an envelope that began, “Sawyer Life Insurance Announces Its 50th Year of Operation … Quality Service to the Community for over Half a Century.”

Teasers can take many forms. You can have a headline only. Or a headline plus copy.

You can use an envelope with a window so the teaser is copy that shows through the window.

You can mail the package in a clear plastic bag so the whole package shows through to tease the reader.

You can even print illustrations, graphics, and photos on the outer envelope.

However, most teasers seem to follow one of three basic formats:

THIS IS THE BEST WIDGET EVER MADE

THIS WIDGET MAY SAVE YOU UP TO $500

ENCLOSED IS YOUR FREE WIDGET



The third teaser works best because it promises a reward for opening the envelope. (The promise of a prize inside has sold millions of dollars’ worth of Cracker Jacks and breakfast cereals.) Even though you know you hold advertising material in your hands, teaser #3 overcomes your resistance to junk mail by making you wonder what’s inside.

Teaser #1 is the worst. It’s pure boasting, and the reader’s reaction to the smug claim will be to throw the mailing away.

Teaser #2, though not as effective as #3, is still an improvement over #1 because it makes the promise of a benefit. This promise says to the reader, “Yes, you hold junk mail in your hands. But it might be worth your while to open the envelope and see what we can do for you.”

A “blind” envelope—one with no teaser—is often more effective than one with a teaser. The idea behind the no-teaser approach is to make the direct-mail package resemble personal mail. When the reader sees the envelope, he’s not sure whether the envelope contains personal mail or advertising material—and so he opens it, just to be sure. Once the mailer is opened, the battle is half won; if the letter contains a strong, compelling lead, you will hook the prospect and get him to read the body copy.

When using the no-teaser approach, take pains to make the letter look like personal mail. Use a plain white or off-white envelope. Don’t let any brightly colored sales literature show through the window, if there is one. And don’t embellish the envelope with a company logo; just have the return address set in plain type.





THE LETTER SELLS, THE BROCHURE TELLS


Many direct-mail packages do an effective selling job with a letter and reply form only.

Every direct-mail package should contain a letter; flyers and brochures are optional. As the writer, you must decide whether a flyer is needed.

Here are some helpful suggestions.

Use a flyer when you are selling products that are colorful or visually impressive: subscriptions to colorful magazines, flowers, fruit, fine foods, coins, collectibles, sports equipment, consumer electronics.

Some products are most effectively sold through demonstration. But you usually can’t demonstrate by mail. The next best thing is to take step-by-step photos of a demonstration and put them in a flyer to be included in the mailer.

Sometimes the offer is so strong that the writer decides to devote the letter solely to benefits. The features of the product itself can then be covered in an accompanying flyer.

Use a flyer for transmitting technical data or product information that is too detailed to be explained or listed in the letter.

In writing direct mail to sell books, I list a detailed table of contents in a flyer separate from the letter. This way, the small percentage of readers interested in some esoteric topic can scan the contents to see if it is included. And if it is, the flyer will have tipped the odds in favor of a sale.

You are not limited to one flyer or one letter or one order form. You can include whatever you think it will take to make the sale.





HOW TO INCREASE RESPONSE TO YOUR MAILINGS


In direct mail, response is the name of the game. Building brand awareness or getting people to remember your message is not important. The only thing that counts is how many sales or inquiries your mailing generates. The more responses, the more successful the mailer.

Reaching the right audience with the right offer and the right copy is the key to successful direct mail. But a number of response-increasing techniques have little to do with copywriting skill or common sense. Here are a few that you can use:

Always include a response mechanism. This can be a business reply card, reply envelope, order form, sales page URL, or toll-free number.

Use self-addressed, postage-paid envelopes and reply cards (known as business reply envelopes and business reply cards). They generate more response than cards or envelopes that require a postage stamp from the prospect.

Order forms and reply cards with tear-off stubs or receipts generate more response than those without.

The letter should be the first thing the reader sees when he opens the envelope. The package should have a natural flow from outer envelope to letter to flyer to reply card.

Offer a premium: a gift to prospects who respond to the mailing. The premium should be something that they want, and it should ideally relate to the product or the offer.

Offer something of value in return for responding to the letter: a free brochure, booklet, catalog, demonstration, survey, estimate, consultation, or trial offer.

Allow for a negative response. And turn it into a positive. The reply card for a letter promoting my freelance copywriting services gives the reader the option of checking off a box that reads, “Not interested right now. But try us again in ______.” Even if the reader doesn’t need my services now, she can still respond to the mailing.

Use physical objects in the mailing. An envelope that feels bulky almost always gets opened. These objects can include product samples, premiums, 3-D pop-ups, and other gimmicks. (I’ve received direct-mail packages that contained instant coffee, chili powder, a set of coasters, a calendar, pens, pencils, a flashlight, and a magnifying glass.) Although costly, mailings with objects enclosed can really stand out in a mailbox or in a basket full of flat envelopes containing regular letters and flyers.

Put a time limit on the offer. Once the reader puts the letter aside, she probably won’t come back to it, so you’ll get the most response if you urge her to act now … by putting a time limit on the offer.

You can put a real date limit on the offer. (“Remember, Beethoven’s Violin Concerto is yours to keep just for taking advantage of this offer within the next 10 days.”)

You can hint that the offer won’t last forever (“But hurry—supplies are limited”).

Or you can add a sense of urgency to your call for action (“Remember—the time to buy insurance is before tragedy strikes. Not after”).

Make the outer envelope resemble an invoice or other “official-looking” document. People almost always open such envelopes.

Use a plain outer envelope with no copy, not even a return address. The mystery of such a mailing is irresistible.

Use a P.S. in the letter to restate the offer or reemphasize a sales point; 80 percent of readers will read a P.S.

Guarantee the offer. When you sell by mail, make a money-back guarantee good for 15, 30, 60, or even 90 days.

When you are generating leads, tell the prospect that he’s under no obligation and that no salesperson will call (unless he wants one to).

Envelopes addressed with labels attached to the reply device and showing through a glassine window on the envelope are often as effective as envelopes individually typed with the recipient’s address. Addressing envelopes by hand can reduce response, perhaps because it looks amateurish.

If your mailing list contains titles but not names, print a description of the person you’re trying to reach on the outer envelope (“Attention Buyers of Electronic Components—Important Information Inside”).

An envelope with live stamps or a postage-metered envelope outpulls an envelope with a preprinted indicia.

An order form printed in color, or designed as an elaborate certificate, or printed with a lot of information outpulls a clean, ordinary-looking order form.

Letters with indented paragraphs, underlined words, and portions of the text set in a second color outpull plain letters.

Letters with a lot of “bells and whistles”—arrows, fake handwritten notes in the margins, spot illustrations, highlighting—can increase response when mailed to lower- and middle-class consumer audiences. Avoid these techniques when writing to business executives, professionals, or upper-class consumers.

A form letter with a headline can often be just as effective as a form letter with the recipient’s name and address typed in by hand.

A package with a separate letter and brochure does better than a combination letter/brochure.

Repeat the offer on the reply card.

Use action words in the first sentence of the reply card and restate the offer in the body copy. (“YES, I’d like to know how I can cut my phone bill in half. Please send a free selection guide on your long-distance services. I understand I’m under no obligation and that no salesperson will call.”)

Avoid intimidating, legal-type wording. State your offer, terms, and guarantee in plain, simple English.

Make it easy to respond to the mailing. This means having a simple offer and an easy-to-complete order form. And be sure to leave enough space on the form for the reader to fill in the required information (a surprising number of reply cards and coupons don’t).

Keep in mind the buyer’s level of interest in your product so you don’t oversell or undersell. (Prospects whose names were taken from the Nintendo Force magazine mailing list probably have a greater interest in video games than the subscribers of Field and Stream.)



Writing direct mail is the best education I can recommend for novice and experienced copywriters alike. Within a few weeks of your mailing, you know whether your copy is successful or not. No other form of copywriting, except for online marketing, yields such immediate or precise feedback on your work.





ALTERNATIVE DM FORMATS


The traditional package described above has long been the workhorse of direct mail. But there are many other direct-mail formats, and they increasingly outperform standard direct-mail packages.

These include bookalogs, magalogs, tabloids, digests, trifold self-mailers, billboard mailers, tear sheets, oversize postcards, impact mailings, video brochures, and shock-and-awe packages. Here are some of the most popular mail formats being used today:

Brochure-style self-mailer—11 x 17–inch sheet folded once to form four panels.

Slim-jim—8½ x 11–inch “letter-size” sheet folded twice to form six panels.

Slim-jim with extra panel—8½ x 14–inch “legal-size” sheet folded three times to form eight panels.

Broadsides—an oversize sheet of paper printed in color on one or both sides and folded for mailing.

Faux newsletter—a direct-mail piece designed to look like an informational newsletter.

Magalogs—a multipage direct-mail piece designed to look like a magazine.

Digests—similar to magalogs but the pages are half the size, made by folding 8½ x 11–inch sheets of paper once vertically and saddle-stitching them.

Bookalog—a long-copy direct-mail promotion in the form of a small paperback book enclosed in a 6 x 9–inch or other envelope with a cover letter and reply form.

Snap Pack Mailers—mailers that are made of multiple plies or pages, and sealed at the edges and at the top. You have to tear off the perforated seals before you can open the snap pack and leaf through the pages.

Tabloids—similar to magalogs but larger, with the pages approximately the same size as in a newspaper.

“Shock-and-awe” package—a box filled with multiple components (e.g., cover letter, product brochure, reply form, DVD or audio CD), plus miscellaneous premiums such as pencils, pens, pads, small toys, posters, candy, and many others.

Video brochures—an expensive mailer that when opened shows one or more product-related videos.

Audio mail—a mailer with a built-in sound chip that plays when you open the letter or brochure.

Structural mailing—a mailer that unfolds and expands into a 3-D structure such as a sphere or miniature building.

Impact mailing—a mailer sent with an attention-getting enclosure such as a bag of shredded money or a brick silkscreened with the sender’s business card.

Oversize postcards—color promotional postcards measuring 6 by 9 inches or larger.

And many more …





8



WRITING BROCHURES, CATALOGS, AND OTHER PRINTED AND PDF SALES MATERIALS



Promotional literature has been around for a long time. According to Ripley’s Believe It or Not, the first brochure was written by Hernán Cortés almost five hundred years ago. It was circulated as a broadside to the people of Spain by Charles V, and it advertised a sale on turkeys.

Even in the digital era, many businesses still use printed sales literature: travel agents, supermarkets, banks, residential contractors, department stores, insurance companies, medical practices, colleges, and many other types of organizations distribute brochures, circulars, flyers, catalogs, and other printed advertising matter to help make the sale.

That’s convenient when a salesperson calls on prospects at their home or office, or when the prospects visit the marketer’s trade show booth. Also, print brochures have a tactile appeal that PDFs don’t. And they’re easier to file for future reference.

In addition, brochures are also often available as PDF downloads from the marketers’ Web sites. Whether print, electronic, or both, advertisers need sales literature for two reasons. First, credibility—people expect a “real” company to have product literature. Anyone can spend $50 on letterhead and business cards and call themselves a corporation. But a brochure, in particular a hard copy, proves you are in business and shows you’re more than a fly-by-night operation.

Second, the brochure is a time-saving device. People want printed information they can take home with them and study at their leisure. But it would take too much time to type individual letters of information to every prospect that asked about your product. And while some prospects love to go on Web sites to learn more about products, others prefer information they can hold in their hands.

The solution is to collect your basic information on a particular product in a single, mass-produced brochure. The brochure gives prospects most of the information they need to know; the rest can be filled in by letter, phone, or a visit to the store.

Even consumers who generally conduct business on PCs and mobile devices, and who can find out what they need to know about your product by going to your Web site, will frequently ask to receive sales literature. A brochure saves them the trouble of printing out information from your Web site.

Brochures support advertising and direct-mail programs. They are also used as sales tools by salespeople and distributors. Brochures are a handy way of quickly communicating the essentials of your product to new customers, prospects, employees, and dealers.

Brochures are primarily a medium of information. They tell prospects what the product is and what it can do for them. Your brochure should also explain how the product works, why people should buy it, and how they can order.

But a good sales brochure does more than explain and inform. It also persuades. Remember, the brochure is a sales tool, not an instruction manual. Good brochure copy does more than list facts or product features; it translates these facts and features into customer benefits—reasons why the customer should buy the product.





11 TIPS ON WRITING BETTER SALES BROCHURES


Here are eleven tips on writing brochures that (a) tell readers what they want to know while (b) selling them on buying the product:





1. Know where the brochure fits into the buying process.


Unlike packaged goods you buy off a supermarket shelf (soap, shampoo, canned beans, cigarettes), products that require a brochure are seldom sold in a single step. Computers, cars, vacation trips, insurance, telephones, financial services, seminars, club memberships, real estate, and dozens of other products and services require several meetings or contacts between buyer and seller before the sale is closed.

For most of these products and services, a brochure comes in somewhere between initial contact and final sale. But where? Do you write the brochure for the uninformed buyer who shows initial interest in the product? Or is the brochure used to build credibility and answer questions as you get closer to closing the sale?

The answer is: it depends on the product, the market, and the advertiser’s individual approach to making the sale. Some advertisers might even use a series of brochures to guide the buyer through the steps of the buying process.

For instance, I make my living as an advertising copywriter. I get sales leads from many sources: ads I run in advertising journals, direct mail, publicity from articles and speeches I give, word of mouth, the Web, and referral from other clients.

When a lead comes in, I chat with the caller to determine his level of interest. By asking a few questions over the phone, I can quickly determine whether the caller is a likely potential customer for my service.

Once I qualify the lead by phone, the next step is to send a comprehensive package of sales literature. It contains seven or eight separate pieces including a biography, client list, four-page sales letter, reprints of articles I’ve written, samples of my copy, a price list, and a form the prospect can use to order copy by mail. In short, it gives the prospective client everything he needs to know about my freelance copywriting services.

From this material, the prospect should be able to decide whether to hire me. There may be a follow-up call or a mailing of more samples of my work, but the basic literature package allows the client to order the service directly, by mail. No additional information or sales visits are required.

On the other hand, a friend of mine who is a management consultant mails very little information to prospects. He sends a brief cover note along with a slim booklet that presents his services in concise outline form.

The reason he sends incomplete information is that the next step in his sales sequence is a meeting with the prospect. If he sent a package as weighty as mine, there would be little left to follow up with. But by sending less, he whets the reader’s appetite with key sales benefits of his service, while raising questions that can only be answered if the reader requests a face-to-face meeting with the consultant.

Keep in mind that we both have Web sites with extensive information about our backgrounds, qualifications, services, and clients. But many prospects who are willing to take the time to visit my Web site also say, “Send me some information in the mail or e-mail.”

Here are some of the ways brochures can fit into the buying process:

•  As leave-behinds. A leave-behind is a brochure you leave behind after a meeting with a potential customer. The leave-behind brochure should summarize your sales pitch and present a fairly complete description of the product and its benefits.

•  As point-of-sale literature. Point-of-sale literature is displayed at the point of sale. A travel agent’s office, for example, typically has racks holding brightly colored pamphlets on trips and tours. The cover of the point-of-sale literature should have a catchy headline and visual that team up to make the passersby stop, pick up, and keep the brochure.

•  To respond to inquiries. An inquiry is a request for more information about your product. The person making the inquiry became interested in you through your advertising, publicity, Google search, or referral and represents a “hot” sales lead—someone much more likely to buy than a prospect who has not contacted you.

The inquiry fulfillment package should contain enough information to answer the prospect’s questions and convince him to take the next step in the buying process. The hot prospect has already expressed interest in your product, so don’t hesitate to load your inquiry fulfillment package full of facts and sales points.

•  As direct mail. As mentioned in chapter 7, brochures and flyers are used to add information to direct-mail packages. The sales letter does the selling; the brochure provides additional sales points, lists technical features, and contains photos and drawings of the product. In the interest of keeping mailing costs down, this type of brochure is usually slim (and is designed to fit in a standard mailing envelope).

•  As a sales support tool. Many products—hospital supplies, office equipment, life insurance, industrial equipment—are sold by salespeople who visit prospects at their home or office. These salespeople use brochures as selling aids in their sales pitches (and also as leave-behinds). Such brochures have large pages, big illustrations, and bold headlines and subheads that lead the salesperson and prospect through the pitch. Sometimes, a standard product brochure is adapted for use as a sales aid and printed as separate panels in a three-ring binder, self-standing easel that sits on the prospect’s desk, or PowerPoint.

Whatever your application—leave-behind, point-of-sale, inquiry fulfillment, direct mail, or sales support—let the advertiser’s particular method of selling be your guide in writing and designing the brochure. The best brochures contain just the right amount of product information and sales pitch to lead the prospect from one step of the buying process to the next.

One additional tip on designing sales literature: think about how the reader will use and file the brochure. A small pocket-size brochure may be ideal for direct mail or point-of-sale display, but it will be lost in a file folder or on a bookshelf of full-size literature (8½ x 11 inches, the kind your competition is probably publishing).

In the same way, a brochure of unconventional shape or size may stand out from the crowd but might be thrown away because it won’t fit in a standard file cabinet. And a brochure aimed at purchasing agents will probably be punched for a three-hole binder, which means part of your copy will be punched out unless you leave sufficient margins.





2. Know whether the brochure stands alone or is supported by other materials.


In some selling situations, the brochure stands alone. Aside from the salesperson, it is the only sales tool the company has.

Other firms use a brochure to supplement their promotional campaign, which may consist of print advertising, radio and TV commercials, direct mail, publicity, trade shows, and seminars.

Some companies have one product—and one brochure. Others use a series of brochures, each describing one product in their product line, or one segment of the total market they sell to.

The brochure writer must know whether his brochure stands alone or is supported by other material, because the existence of other material determines the content of his brochure.

For example, a company that has detailed product features and specifications on its Web site may elect to simply summarize the high points in an abbreviated brochure, and include the Web site URL as a source of more detailed information.

Some duplication among different promotional pieces may be necessary, but avoid creating too many redundant sales brochures. For instance, I normally devote half a page of an eight-page product brochure to a description of the manufacturer and their capabilities.

But if the manufacturer already had a separate “corporate capabilities brochure,” I wouldn’t need to do that. Instead, we could mail both brochures—product and company—to prospects requesting more information.

Another example. A client asked me to write a sales brochure on an industrial mixer. He wanted to include detailed calculations on how to determine the energy consumption of the mixer.

Although some engineers might be curious as to how the calculation is done, such an elaborate mathematical treatment is wasted space in a selling piece. The solution was to talk about energy savings without showing the calculation in the sales brochure, and to create a separate “technical information sheet” that showed the detailed calculation.

Find out the environment in which your brochure will be working. Is it a stand-alone brochure or part of a series? Is it supported by print ads, direct mail, publicity?

Has the advertiser also published an annual report, corporate capabilities brochure, catalog, or other general brochure describing the corporation? Are there article reprints, fact sheets, or other pieces of literature that can be mailed along with the main brochure?

Form should follow function. I was asked to write sales literature describing a system of modular software. For this modular product, I wrote a modular brochure. The main piece is a four-page folder. Copy giving the reader an overview of the system is printed on the left inside page; the right page is a pocket containing eight sheets, each describing a different software module.

This approach allows salespeople to use the sheets as separate flyers for presentations and mailings. In addition, the brochure is easy to update. When a new module is added to the package, or an existing module is updated, we just add a flyer to the brochure.





3. Know your audience.


We’ve already seen that a brochure must fit into the right step in the buying process. Your brochure must also fit the informational needs of your audience. Think about the readers and what they expect to get out of the brochure. Ask yourself, “How can I use the brochure to convince the readers to buy the product?”

Let’s say you are writing a brochure selling alfalfa seeds to farmers. The farmer probably isn’t interested in the history of alfalfa (or the history of your company). And he doesn’t much care about alfalfa’s biological structure or the chemical composition of the seed.

The farmer wants to know that your seeds are plump and healthy … that they’re free of weeds … that they’ll yield a good, healthy crop of alfalfa … and that the price is right.

How do you convince him? One way is to show the results. Put two photos of alfalfa fields on the cover of your brochure. The one on the left shows weed-infested, scrawny alfalfa. The one on the right shows a field of lush, healthy plants. Add a caption that tells him the field on the right was planted with your seeds, and how your seeds can increase crop yield by 40 percent.

The brochure can go even further. Why not attach a sample bag of seed to the brochure and mail it to the farmer? The brochure copy can begin, “Our alfalfa is clean, healthy, practically weed-free. But don’t take our word for it. See for yourself.”

Know your reader. Farmers don’t want hype or a scientific treatise; they want straightforward talk that shows them how to run their farms more profitably. Scientists are most comfortable with charts, graphs, and tables of data, so include plenty of them in a brochure aimed at scientists.

Engineers are at home with diagrams and blueprints. Accountants understand tables of financial figures. Human resource managers will probably be interested in photos of people.

Also, the length of your copy depends not only on the amount of information you have, but on whether your customer is someone who will read a lot of copy. A brochure selling a new microfilm system to librarians can be long, because librarians like to read.

A brochure aimed at busy executives should probably be shorter, because most executives are pressed for time. A brochure offering a new cable TV service will probably contain mostly pictures, because people who watch a lot of TV would rather look at pictures than read.





4. Put a strong selling message on the front cover.


The first thing readers see when they pull your brochure out of an envelope or off a display rack is the cover. If the cover promises a strong benefit or reward for reading the copy, the reader will open the brochure and read it (or at least look at the pictures, captions, and headings).

If the selling message on the cover is weak or, worse, if there is no selling message on the cover, the reader has no motivation for opening the brochure. It is just junk mail, something to be thrown away.

A surprising number of brochure covers contain no headline or visual, just the product name and company logo. This is like running an ad without a headline: it wastes a valuable selling opportunity.

For instance, a brochure from the Prudential Insurance Company of America has the headline: “Now … you can enroll in this AARP Plan of Group Hospital Insurance—designed to help pay expenses your other insurance does not cover!” The cover is illustrated with a drawing of a retired couple enjoying a life of leisure.

This brochure cover is effective because it offers a strong, solid benefit, simply stated: “Designed to help pay expenses your other insurance does not cover!” What gimmick or clever cover design could do a better selling job than this promise?

Sometimes, the visual communicates the benefit more strongly than the headline. My favorite summer retreat is Montauk, Long Island, and no words can make me long for a weekend on the island as much as a beautiful color photo of the waves rolling in and lapping against the soft sands of the shore. If you own a hotel on the Montauk beach, put such a photo on the cover, and I’ll be sold!

Occasionally, a brochure writer attempts to lure the reader into the brochure with a gimmick that doesn’t relate to the product. In front of me is a brochure whose cover features a drawing of a church and a diamond ring and the headline, “Forget about marriage … why not just ‘get engaged.’”

This caught my eye years ago, when I was engaged. But when I opened the brochure, I was given a sales pitch on why it’s better to rent cars instead of buying them. The brochure had nothing at all to do with engagement or marriage. I was more than disappointed: I felt misled. I’m sure other folks felt the same and I doubt that this brochure sold many car rental contracts.

The traditional brochure cover contains a headline and graphic only, with no text; body copy begins inside. But you can get people to start reading your sales pitch by breaking this tradition and beginning your body copy on the front cover. The readers’ eyes will automatically go to the lead paragraph, and if it’s strong enough, they’ll be hooked.





5. Give complete information.


Give as much information as it takes to get the prospect to take the next step in the buying process.

The average brochure contains a lot of words. Certainly more than you read in most ads or hear in TV commercials.

But remember that the brochure is a medium of information. Ads, commercials, and direct mail may be an unwanted interruption in the reader’s life. But the reader has asked for the brochure, and he is interested in the information it contains.

Don’t be afraid to make the brochure as long as it has to be. Include all the necessary information—prices, product specifications, ordering information, guarantees, descriptions.

The reader who represents a serious potential customer will read the copy as long as it is interesting and engaging. The minute you write boring copy, or copy that doesn’t give useful information, you’ll turn the reader off.

There is a ridiculous tendency among brochure designers to use a large amount of white space on the page and very little copy. I’ve seen 8½ x 11–inch brochures where each page had only one or two paragraphs in small type in the upper corner. The rest of the page was mostly blank and decorated by some graphic design: stripes, color patterns, lines, shapes.

This is a waste of space and printing costs. Your customer doesn’t send for your brochure to look at fancy designs; she sends for it because she wants information. If you want proof that this myth is untrue, take a look at your daily newspaper: pages and pages of sold text and photos. No white space, no graphic “design elements.” Just information that the reader wants and has paid for.

Of course, not every page in your brochure should be solid type to the edges. Margins and space between paragraphs help increase readability. Photos, illustrations, captions, and subheads break up the text and help tell the story. But to think your brochure should be largely blank space is folly. Don’t be afraid to write and print all the words it takes to make your sales pitch. Give the reader complete information.





6. Organize your selling points.


People read brochures in much the same order they read paperback novels. They look at the cover first, maybe take a quick peek at the back cover, and thumb through the book once. Then, if it looks promising, they open to here and start reading.

Your brochure, like a novel, should have a logical structure to it. A good brochure tells a story—a product story—with a beginning, a middle, and an end. The organization of a brochure is dictated both by the product story you want to tell and by the informational needs of the reader.

For example, my in-laws had a business in which they bought books from publishers and resold them to corporations. This is a rather unusual service, one the corporate librarian may not have thought about before, so my in-laws began their brochure with a summary of the service they offered and why corporate librarians would find it useful.

Next, they presented six major benefits of using the service. These benefits were listed in simple 1-2-3 fashion so the reader could quickly see how she could come out ahead by doing business with the book-buying service.

Finally, the brochure told the reader the technical details of how the service worked and gave instructions for placing orders.

Let the organization of your brochure be dictated by what your customer wants to know about your product. If you own a computer store, and you find that customers coming in off the street seem to ask the same questions over and over, you might write a booklet titled “Six Important Questions to Ask Before You Buy a Computer.” The booklet would present computer shopping tips in a simple question-and-answer format.

If your company designs and decorates offices, your brochure could be organized as a walking tour of the modern office. At each point of the tour, from the copier to the water cooler, the copy could point out how redesigning that section of the office can make the office a better place to work and improve productivity.

There are many ways to organize a brochure: alphabetical order, chronological order, by size of product, by importance of customer benefit, question and answer, list of customer benefits, by product line, by price, by application, by market, by steps in the ordering process. Choose the approach that best fits your product, your audience, and your sales pitch.





7. Divide the brochure into short, easy-to-read sections.


As you organize your brochure, devise a way to organize your material: an outline that breaks the topic into a number of sections and subsections.

You should keep this organizational scheme in the final copy. Write the brochure as a series of short sections and subsections, each with its own headline or subhead.

There are a number of benefits to this approach. First, the use of headings and subheads allows readers to get the message even if they only scan the brochure. Many people won’t read all the copy, but a series of heads and subheads gives them the gist of the sales pitch at a glance.

Be sure to write headings and subheads that tell a story. Avoid headings that are just clever plays on words. Instead of “Hitachi plays it cool,” write, “Hitachi chiller-heaters cut cooling costs in half.”

Second, breaking the copy into short sections makes the brochure easier to read. People are intimidated and tired by long chunks of text; they prefer to read a short section of copy, stop, take a rest, and absorb the information before going on to the next section. (This is why novels are divided into chapters.)

Third, short sections make the brochure easier to write. You just follow your outline and put the information in your notes under the appropriate section. If you uncover new facts that don’t fit anywhere in the outline, you can simply add a new section to the brochure. And, like your reader, you can rest after writing one section before you go on to the next.

When you write your brochure, think about how the sections will appear on the pages of the published brochure. For example, you might like the clean look and feel of having a six-page brochure with four sections (one on each page), a headline on the front cover, and the company logo and address on the back cover.

Some brochure writers design their brochures so that each page contains a complete section or two. Other writers claim that a good way of getting the reader to turn the page is to have the sections run off one page and continue on the next. Both techniques have their merits, and the choice is really a matter of taste. But you should be aware of how organization and layout work together.

If your brochure is folded or designed in an unusual format, make a mock-up out of scrap paper. Use the mock-up (called a “dummy”) to show the layout and how the copy flows from page to page. Make sure that the reader will see the various sections of text in the same order you wrote them in the manuscript.





8. Use hardworking visuals.


Photos in brochures are not ornaments. They are included to help sell the product by showing what it looks like, how it works, and what it can do for the reader.

The best brochure photos demonstrate the product’s usefulness by showing it in action. Putting people in these photos usually adds to the visual’s appeal (people like looking at pictures of people).

Photos make the best visuals because they offer proof that a product exists and works. But artwork is also useful for many purposes.

A drawing can illustrate a product or process that is not easily photographed (such as the inner workings of an automobile engine).

A map can show where something is located.

A diagram can show how something works or how it is organized. An organizational diagram, for example, uses arrows and boxes to show how the divisions and branches of a company are organized.

A graph is used to tell how one quantity changes as another quantity changes. In a brochure on air-conditioning, a graph could show how your electric bill goes up as you lower the temperature setting on your air conditioner.

Pie charts show proportions and percentages (for example, the percentage of your company’s annual income spent on research and development). Bar charts demonstrate comparisons among quantities (this year’s sales versus last year’s). And tables are a handy way of listing a body of data too large to include in the text of the brochure.

Use visuals when they can express or illustrate a concept better than words can. If the visual doesn’t improve on the written description, don’t use it.

Popular brochure visuals include:

Product photographs

Pictures of the product photographed next to other objects to give a sense of the size of the product. (A brochure on semiconductors might show a photo of a microchip on a postage stamp to dramatically convey the smallness of the integrated circuit.)

Photos of actual installations of the product

Photos of the product in use

Photos of the product being manufactured

Tables of product specifications

Tables summarizing product features and benefits

Photos of items made with (or from) the product

Photos of the company headquarters, manufacturing plant, or research laboratories

Photos of the product packed and ready for shipping

Photos of the product being tested by company scientists or inspected for quality control

Photos of people who are enjoying the use of the product

Photos of people who attest to the product’s superiority

Tables listing the various models and versions of the product

Graphs presenting scientific proof of the product’s performance (heat tests, ability to stand up under pressure, longevity of operation, etc.)

Photos of available parts and accessories

A series of photos demonstrating the product’s performance or how to use it

Diagrams explaining how the product works or how it is put together

Sketches of planned product improvements, forthcoming new products, or more applications



Always use visuals that illustrate your key selling points. In an automobile brochure that extols the benefits of rack-and-pinion steering, it would be helpful to have a diagram that shows how rack-and-pinion steering works. But if rack-and-pinion steering is not a selling point, there would be no reason to include a picture of it.

Label all visuals with captions. Studies show that brochure captions get twice the readership of body copy. Use captions to reinforce the body copy or make an additional sales point not covered in the copy.

Make captions interesting and informative. Instead of labeling a photo “Automatic wiring device,” write “A microprocessor-controlled, fully automatic wiring device (above left) makes approximately 1,000 wire-wrap connections an hour, significantly reducing manufacturing costs.”





9. Find the next step in the buying process—and tell the reader to take it.


Do you want your reader to buy pasta from your gourmet shop? Enroll for membership in your health spa? Visit your factory? Or test-drive a new luxury sedan?

A brochure moves the customer from one step in the buying process to the next.

To do this successfully, the brochure must identify this next step and tell the reader to take it.

Typically, this “call for action” appears at the end of the brochure. The copy urges the reader to call or go online for more information, or to take some other action. Make it easy for the reader to respond by using such devices as reply cards, self-addressed stamped envelopes, order forms, toll-free numbers, URLs, and listings of local dealerships and distributors.

End the brochure with copy designed to generate an immediate response. Use action words and phrases: “Give us a call today.” “For more information, write for our FREE catalog.” “Please complete and mail the enclosed reply card.” “Visit our store nearest you.” “Order today—supplies limited.” “Download your free selection guide now.”

Here’s an effective closing from a brochure for an advertising agency:

THE NEXT STEP

Now that you know something about us, we’d like to know a little bit more about you.

Send us your current ads, sales literature, and press releases for a free, no-obligation evaluation of your marketing communications program.

If you’d like to meet with us, give us a call. We’ll be glad to show you some of the work we’ve done for our clients, and take a look at what we can do for you.



This closing is effective for three reasons: 1) it’s personal; 2) it asks for specific action (“Send us your current ads,” “Give us a call”); and 3) it offers the reader something for free (“a no-obligation evaluation of your marketing communications program”).

Always ask for the order i