n your brochure. Or at least for action that will lead to an eventual sale.





10. Don’t overlook the obvious.


Sometimes you get so wrapped up in the creative aspects of copywriting that you forget to include basic information—phone numbers, directions, street addresses, store hours, zip codes, and guarantees.

When you write a brochure, don’t forget the obvious. Often, seemingly minor details can mean the difference between a sale and a no-sale.

For instance, one company forgot to include its second telephone number in a direct-mail brochure. As a result, the phone was frequently busy when prospects called in to order the product, and many sales were lost.

When you’re proofreading your brochure copy, be sure you’ve checked the following items:

Company logo, name, and address

Phone numbers

E-mail address

Street address in addition to box number

Directions (“located on the corner of Fifth and Main off I-95”)

Prices, store hours, branch locations

List of distributors, dealers, or sales reps

Instructions for placing orders by phone, mail, online, or text

Credit cards accepted

Product guarantees and warranties

Shipping and service information

Trademarks, registration marks, disclaimers, and other legal information

Form numbers, dates, codes, copyright lines

Web site URL



Also, be sure to proofread for errors in spelling, punctuation, and grammar.

These details are important. For instance, mail-order firms know their sales increase when they add a toll-free number and “major credit cards accepted” to their brochures.





11. Make the brochure worth keeping.


When the customer receives your brochure, he can do one of three things:

1. Respond to it by placing an order or asking for more information.

2. File it for future reference.

3. Throw it away.

You want the first two things to happen. You want the customer to respond to your brochure. And you want her to save it for when she needs the product again in the future.

To get someone to save your brochure, you must write a brochure that is worth keeping. Brochures that are worth keeping are valuable because of the information they contain. This information may be directly related to the product. Or it may be service information of a general nature that is indirectly related to the product.

For example, a brochure for a resort hotel in Montauk might print a detailed map of the town on the back cover. Travelers will save the brochure because of the map.

The literature package I mail to potential clients for my freelance copywriting services includes a reprint of an article I wrote (“Ten Tips for Writing More Effective Industrial Copy”). The reprint includes my picture, name, address, and phone number. Even if prospects throw away the promotional part of my package, they are likely to keep the article because it contains information that may be useful to them in their work.

Most people don’t have a good idea of how the stock market works. So if a broker published a booklet titled, “A Layperson’s Introduction to the Stock Market … and How to Play It,” people would be likely to save this booklet. Later, when they accumulate enough money to invest in stocks, they would find the brochure in their files and call the broker or open an online account.

So if you want your brochure to keep selling for you, make your brochure worth keeping. Another example: a casino added value to its promotional brochure by printing the rules of blackjack on the back cover.





HOW TO ORGANIZE YOUR BROCHURE COPY


This is an oversimplification, but basically there are only three types of brochures:

1. Brochures about a product

2. Brochures about a service

3. Brochures about a company (known as “corporate” brochures or “capabilities” brochures)

The content and organization of every brochure is unique, because every selling situation and product, service, or company is unique. However, many brochures share common characteristics. Most brochures describing consulting services, for example, include a list of the consultant’s clients.

Below are three outlines for “typical” product, service, and company brochures. These will give you a rough idea of what to include in the sales literature you write for your clients.





For a Product Brochure


•  Introduction—a capsule description of what the product is and why the reader of the brochure should be interested in it.

•  Benefits—a list of reasons why the customer should buy the product.

•  Features—highlights of important product features that set the product apart from the competition.

•  “How it works”—a description of how the product works and what it can do. This section can include the results of any tests that demonstrate the product’s superiority.

•  Types of users (markets)—this section describes the special markets the product is designed for. A wastewater plant, for example, might be sold to municipalities, utilities, and industrial plants: three separate and distinct markets, each with its own special set of requirements. This section might also include an actual list of names of well-known people or organizations that use and endorse the product.

•  Applications—descriptions of the various applications in which the product can be used.

•  Product availability—lists of models, sizes, materials of construction, options, accessories, and all the variations in which you can order the product. This section can also include charts, graphs, formulas, tables, or other guidelines to aid the reader in product selection.

•  Pricing—information on what the product costs. Includes prices for accessories, various models and sizes, quantity discounts, and shipping and handling. Often printed on a separate sheet inserted into the brochure so the brochure does not become obsolete when prices change.

•  Technical specifications—electrical requirements, power consumption, resistance to moisture, temperature range, operating conditions, cleaning methods, storage conditions, chemical properties, and other characteristics and limitations of the product.

•  Questions and answers—answers to frequently asked questions about the product. Includes information not found in the other sections.

•  Company description—a brief biography of the manufacturer, designed to show the reader that the product is backed by a solid, reputable organization that won’t go out of business.

•  Support—information on delivery, installation, training, maintenance, service, and guarantees.

•  “The next step”—instructions on how to order the product (or on how to get more information on the product).





For a Brochure Describing a Service


•  Introduction—outlines the services offered, types of accounts handled, and reasons why the reader should be interested in the service.

•  Services offered—detailed descriptions of each of the various services rendered by the firm.

•  Benefits—describes what readers will gain from the service and why they should engage the services of your firm instead of the competition.

•  Methodology—outlines the service firm’s method of rendering its service.

•  Client list—a list of people or organizations who have used and endorse the firm’s services.

•  Testimonials—statements of endorsements from select clients. Testimonials are usually written in the client’s own words, surrounded by quotation marks, and attributed to a specific person or organization.

•  Fees and terms—describes the fees for each service and the terms and method of payment required. Also includes whatever guarantee the service firm makes to its clients.

•  Biographical information—capsule biographies highlighting the credentials of the key employees of the service firm.

•  “The next step”—instructions on what to do next if you are interested in hiring the firm or learning more about its services.





For a Corporate Brochure


The business or businesses the company is engaged in

The corporate structure (parent company, divisions, departments, subsidiaries, branch offices)

Corporate “philosophy” or mission statement

Company history

Plants and branch offices

Geographical coverage

Major markets

Distribution system

Sales

Ranking in its field relative to competition

Extent of stock distribution

Earnings and dividend records

Number of employees

Employee benefits

Noteworthy employees

Inventions

Significant achievements (including industry “firsts”)

Research and development

Quality-control practices

Community relations (environmental programs, contributions to public welfare, charitable activities, support of the arts, etc.)

Awards

Policies

Objectives, goals, plans for the future



The above outlines are suggestions only, not mandatory formats. Mold them to suit your needs; let your product, audience, and sales objectives be your primary guide to content and organization of the copy.

Prior to widespread Internet access, brochures tended to be lengthy—eight, twelve, sixteen, even twenty-four pages or longer—because they were the primary vehicle for communicating product information.

In the digital age, Web sites have now taken that role as the repository of all product information. Many brochures today are just four to six pages presenting the highlights, with the detailed and in-depth product data available online.





CATALOGS


Catalogs are similar to brochures but with two important differences:

1. Brochures usually tell an in-depth story about a single product. Catalogs give short descriptions of many products. Because each item is given limited space, descriptions must be terse. Catalog copy is often written in a clipped, telegram-like style, with crisp, short sentences that convey a great deal of information in the fewest possible words.

2. The brochure’s mission is usually to provide enough information to take the reader to the next step in the buying process. Many catalogs are mail-order vehicles from which you can order the product directly; salespeople are rarely involved. (The exception is the industrial product catalog.) As a result, a great deal of the copywriter’s time is spent designing an order form that is easy to use and encourages the reader to send in an order.

In addition to using the order forms in catalogs, consumers can also place their orders by phone or online. This has resulted in many companies drastically shortening their catalogs and serving to drive prospects to the Web site for product information and ordering.

While they are fewer in number, thick catalogs are still published by some companies, especially those who produce catalogs as product reference guides for purchasing agents. A good example is Uniline, a hefty compendium of shipping supplies.

A popular strategy today is to mail a mixture of short and long catalogs throughout the year. For instance, mail a large full-line product catalog to your customers quarterly—four times a year—and a slimmer catalog monthly for the other eight months. These shorter catalogs contain fewer pages than the full quarterly catalogs and focus on driving customers to the company Web site for more production details.

Catalog writing is a separate art from brochure writing. The basics are the same but the mechanics are different. Here are a few tips to help you write successful catalogs:





Write Snappy Headlines


Even if space requires that your catalog headlines be short, you can still add selling power to them. Don’t be content to simply describe the product in the headline; add a fresh phrase, a strong benefit, a descriptive adjective that hints at the product’s distinct qualities.

In its order-by-mail book catalogs, Boardroom Books turns mundane book titles into strong, hard-selling catalog headlines. Instead of The Book of Tax Knowledge, they write, “3,147 Tax-Saving Ideas.” For a book titled Successful Tax Planning, the catalog description reads, “Did your tax accountant ever tell you all this?” And a book on how to buy computers is advertised with the provocative headline, “What the computer salespeople don’t tell you.”





Include a “Letter from the Manufacturer”


Many catalogs include a “personal” letter from the company president, either printed on letterhead and bound into the catalog or printed directly onto one of the pages in the front of the catalog, often the inside front cover.

In the letter, the president talks about the quality of the products in the catalog, the firm’s commitment to serving its customers, and the manufacturer’s guarantee of customer satisfaction. The letter may also be used as an introduction to the company’s product line, or to call attention to a particular product or group of products that is especially noteworthy or attractively priced.

Here’s a homey paragraph from a letter in an L.L.Bean catalog:

“L.L.” had a simple business philosophy: “Sell good merchandise at a reasonable profit, treat your customers like human beings and they’ll always come back for more.” We call this “L.L.’s” golden rule. Today, 72 years later, we still practice it.



You can’t help but be won over by the good sense of this honorable business philosophy and the sincerity of its statement. Putting a letter in your catalog adds warmth and a human quality to an otherwise impersonal presentation of product facts, specifications, and prices.





Give All the Key Product Facts


A catalog description must give the reader all the information needed to order the product. This includes sizes, colors, materials, prices, and styles. The copy should also give readers a concise but complete description of the product, so they can make a decision as to whether they want to buy it.





Devote the Most Space to Your Best Sellers


Devote a full page or half page to your best-selling items and list them up front. Less popular items get a quarter page or less and appear toward the back of the catalog. Items that don’t sell should be dropped altogether, or appear only on the Web.





Use Techniques That Stimulate Sales


These include toll-free numbers; credit card orders accepted; a gift to the customer for placing an order; two-for-one offers; arrows, stars, bursts, and other graphic devices used to highlight special discounts within the catalog; last-minute items added as a special insert sheet or printed on the order form; volume discount for large orders (“10% off when your order exceeds $50”); discount codes for customers ordering online; gift packaging available for merchandise ordered as gifts; special sale items featured on the order form.





Make the Order Form Simple and Easy to Fill Out


Give the customer sufficient space for writing in his order. Print step-by-step instructions for ordering right on the form. Print the guarantee in large type and set it off with a border. Provide a business reply envelope in which the customer can enclose his check. And, of course, give alternative order options: fax, Web, and toll-free number.





Indicate Discounted Items in the Copy


One way of doing this is to write, “25% Off! Was $11.95—Now $8.95.” Another is to cross out the old price and write in the new price—$11.95 “$8.95.”





OTHER TYPES OF SALES LITERATURE


Brochures and catalogs account for most of the sales literature published in the world. Still, there are a few other types of sales literature you may be asked to write.





Annual Reports


Annual reports, the number of which seems to diminish with each passing year, are summaries of the company’s performance for the past year. They combine the company information found in “capabilities brochures” with financial data on the company’s sales, profits, revenues, and dividends. Annual reports are usually lavish affairs, printed on glossy stock and featuring expensive four-color photography, sophisticated graphics, and stylish copy.





Flyers


Flyers are sales literature printed on one or two sides of an unfolded 8½ x 11–inch piece of paper. Visuals, if used, are limited to simple line drawings. Flyers are used as handouts at conventions and trade shows or as bulletins posted around the neighborhood. Many small businesses find flyers an inexpensive way of reaching new customers.





Broadsides


Broadsides are flyers folded for mailing. Companies that maintain mailing lists of customers often send monthly broadsides announcing sales, new products, or other news of interest to their customers.





Invoice Stuffers


Invoice stuffers are small pieces of promotional literature designed to fit in #10 envelopes. They are mailed to customers along with the monthly bill or statement and used to announce a sale or solicit mail-order sales of a special item. The advantage of using invoice stuffers is that they get a “free ride” in the mail because they’re sent with routine correspondence rather than in separate mailings.





Circulars


Circulars are printed advertising sheets that are mailed, inserted in packages or newspapers, or distributed by hand or in stores. They are usually four to eight pages long, printed in color, and contain price-off coupons for products sold in local retail outlets.





Pamphlets


Also called booklets, pamphlets are similar to brochures, except they usually contain useful information of a general nature while brochures describe the features and benefits of specific products and services.





White Papers


A white paper is a promotional piece in the guise of an informational article or report. Just as many infomercials convey the look and feel of an informative, unbiased TV program rather than a paid commercial, a white paper attempts to convince readers that they are being educated—about the issue or problem your product addresses (e.g., computer security, improving customer service, managing your sales force, saving for retirement), rather than being sold on a specific product.

The white paper serves the same sales purpose as a brochure—to sell or help sell a product or service—but it reads and looks like an article or other important piece of authoritative, objective information.

Unlike a sales brochure, a white paper must contain useful “how-to” information that helps the reader solve a problem or make or justify a key business decision (e.g., whether to lease or build a new warehouse).

But make no mistake, both the brochure and the white paper have the same ultimate objective: to sell or help sell a company’s product or service.

Where white papers and brochures differ is their approach to making the sale: brochures contain a straightforward presentation of product features and benefits, whereas white papers take more of a “soft-sell” approach. Chapter 17 covers the organization, contents, and format of white papers in greater detail.





9



WRITING PUBLIC RELATIONS MATERIALS



When the first edition of this handbook was published in 1985, the primary audience for press releases was newspaper and magazine editors and reporters as well as radio and TV producers.

But in the Internet age, marketers post press releases on their Web sites, where they are read by consumers, who have become the bigger audience for PR materials. Therefore this updated PR chapter will show how to write releases to be read by consumers as well as journalists, and that are optimized for search engines through use of keyword phrases.





HOW PR DIFFERS FROM PAID ADVERTISING


Although public relations is a different discipline than advertising, they overlap, and almost every copywriter is asked to write press releases or other public relations materials at some point.

To the copywriter trained in hard-sell persuasive writing, the soft-sell touch of PR writing takes some getting used to.

Advertising reaches readers directly and makes a blatant, undisguised pitch to part them from their money. Press releases are sent to editors in the hopes that editors will publish them in their magazines or papers.

Once you send out a release, you have no control over when it will appear, in what form it will appear, or even whether it will appear. The editor can publish the release as is, rewrite it or cut it as he or she pleases, use it as the basis for a different story, or ignore it altogether. The editor has total control and, unlike the publication’s advertising department, has no interest in helping you promote your firm.

The editor’s only concern is publishing a magazine or paper filled with news and information of interest to his readers. If your press release contains such news or information, the editor is likely to use it. If the release is just a warmed-over ad, the editor will recognize it as such and trash it.

Companies new to public relations ask me, “Do editors really use press releases?” The answer is that they do. The Columbia Journalism Review surveyed an issue of the Wall Street Journal to find out how many of the stories were generated by press releases. The survey revealed that 111 stories on the inside pages were taken from press releases, either word for word or paraphrased. In only 30 percent of these stories did reporters put in additional facts not contained in the original release.

There are no figures on how many press releases are generated each year, but my guess is that it runs into the hundreds of thousands—maybe even the millions.

One reason why press releases are so popular is that they are inexpensive. To print a one-page release and mail it to a hundred editors costs around $100—and less if you send it pasted into the body of an e-mail, which is the way most press releases are distributed today.

If an editor picks up your release and runs it as a short article in the magazine, your firm receives the space free. Running an ad of the same size could cost hundreds or even thousands of dollars.

What’s more, publicity is more credible than paid advertising. The public has a built-in skepticism for advertising but is more likely to believe what it reads in the paper or hears on TV. They do not realize that most of the news they read and hear is generated by press releases—releases sent out by the same firms that run ads and commercials.

But there is no guarantee that a press release will be picked up by the media or, once picked up, will generate much interest or new business. Some releases are ignored; others generate spectacular results. When Leisure Time Ice sent out a press kit claiming that packaged ice is clearer and purer than homemade ice, the head of the association was interviewed by at least twenty-five editors and appeared on fifteen radio and TV talk shows.

The Wall Street Journal, New York Times, Los Angeles Times, United Press International, and Associated Press all ran feature stories on Leisure Time Ice. The association’s membership increased by 10 percent. And sales of manufactured ice went up. More and more firms are using publicity to promote their products and services.

Even professionals who traditionally look down upon public relations—doctors, lawyers, architects, engineers, management consultants—are now writing releases, placing stories, and appearing on radio and TV talk shows: a survey of 523 members of the American Bar Association revealed that 20 percent of these lawyers use publicity to promote their practices.





DIRECT-TO-CONSUMER PR ON THE WEB


By far the biggest development in public relations in the twenty-first century is “DTC PR”—direct-to-consumer public relations.

In the twentieth century, press releases were sent to and seen by media outlets only: newspaper editors and reporters, magazine editors, program directors and radio stations, and television producers. This is “DTM PR”—direct-to-media public relations—and indeed virtually all PR was DTM PR.

These media professionals either threw the press releases in the trash because the content was not of interest to them or used some of the material in their publication or broadcast. Most commonly, some of the content in the release was used as source material for stories the reporters and editors were working on.

Or sometimes, most notably in trade magazines and newsletters, an excerpt from the press release was published as a short stand-alone item. On occasion, the publication would print the entire release almost word for word as you gave it to them, when the topic was of great interest to readers and all the content was interesting or useful—or it saved the publication’s staff writer from having to do the work herself.

Now, press releases are also used in DTC PR. The marketer’s Web site typically has a section called “Press Releases,” “Press Room,” “News,” or “Media.” All or at least major press releases distributed to the media are also posted in the PR section of the site, typically in HTML, where visitors can read them directly, as they were written, without the vetting or editing by the media.

There is virtually no difference between DTM and DTC press releases save one. When preparing to post your DTC PR on your Web site, make sure to judiciously add relevant keywords to the text. This can help ensure that the press release shows up when prospects are searching that keyword. In addition, having a lot of press releases on your site can raise your search engine rankings, because Google and other search engines give higher ranking to content than to sales copy such as product pages.





WHAT IS A PRESS RELEASE?


A press release is a news story prepared by an organization and distributed to the media for the purpose of publicizing the organization’s products, services, or activities.

Here’s a sample of an effective release typed in the proper press-release format:

FROM: Kirsch Communications, 226 Seventh Street, Garden City, NY 11530

For more information please call: Len Kirsch, XXX-XXX-XXXX

FOR: Pinwheel Systems, 404 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10016

Contact: John N. Schaedler, President, XXX-ABC-DEFG

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

INTRODUCTORY KIT FOR NEW “RUFF-PROOFS” COLOR COMPS OFFERED BY PINWHEEL SYSTEMS

A special Introductory Kit of watercolor dyes and other supplies which can be used with its new “Ruff-Proofs” do-it-yourself coloring system has been developed by Pinwheel Systems, New York, it was announced today by John N. Schaedler, president of the company.

Ruff-Proofs are latent-image prints made from black and white artwork. They can be transformed into multicolor art for layout and design comps, packaging, flip charts and other graphics, Schaedler said, merely by applying watercolor dyes or markers. (Patents are pending on the process.)

The prints are delivered in sets of four to give the artist an opportunity to experiment with different colors and explore varying color combinations. They are available from franchised Pinwheel Studios.

The Introductory Kit has a retail value of $45, Schaedler said, and is being offered to artists and designers for $20 with the purchase of Ruff-Proofs. It contains a complete set of coloring materials:



A 36-bottle assortment of Dr. P. H. Martin’s Synchromatic Transparent Watercolor Dyes, with a swatch card of actual color chips.

A 30-cup palette for mixing colors, squeeze-bottle dispensers for water and cleanup solution, plus absorbent tissues and cotton swabs used in the coloring process.



More information about the kits and the Ruff-Proofs process is available from John Schaedler at Pinwheel Systems, 404 Park Avenue South, New York, NY, telephone XXX-ABC-DEFG.



Here are twelve tips on press-release format and content.

1. What you say is more important than using fancy PR letterheads or layouts. Clarity and accuracy are critical.

2. When an outside public relations firm writes the release for you, its name and your own should appear as the sources for the release. If you wrote the release yourself, you become the sole source for more information. Either way, be sure to include names and phone numbers so the editor can get more information if needed.

3. The release can be dated with a release date or with the phrase “For Immediate Release.” Date the release one day in advance of the actual distribution date to make it timely.

4. Place the release date under the headline and underline it.

5. The headline should sum up your story. Maximum length: two to three lines. This tells a busy editor, at a glance, if the story is worth considering.

6. The lead contains the “who, what, when, where, why, and how.” If the editor chops everything else, at least you’ve gotten the guts of your story across.

7. Include a person to be credited if there’s something worth quoting or if you make any claims. Editors don’t want to take the position they are claiming something—they’d rather hang it on you. The personal credits often get deleted, but it’s wise to put them in where needed.

8. The body of the story picks up the additional facts. Lay off the superlatives and complimentary adjectives. Remember, the press releases is content, not advertising.

9. Length: shoot for a single page, no more than two pages. Beyond that, reading becomes a burden for the editor.

10. When the reader might need it, include the name, address, phone number, and e-mail of someone to contact for more information.

11. Photos, visuals, and graphics can be pasted into the body of the e-mail. But add a note to the editor that separate image files of 300 dots per inch (dpi) are available upon request.

12. Keep the release simple, straightforward, newsy. If you need only two paragraphs, don’t write ten. Excess verbiage turns editors off, especially now that most releases are distributed via e-mail or online PR distribution services rather than mailed as hard copies.





YES, BUT IS IT NEWS?


Editors look for press releases containing news. Like a good ad, the headline of the press release must instantly transmit the news to the reader.

Editors are flooded with press releases and don’t have time to wade through your release and dig for the real story: an editor at a technology magazine said her staff received two thousand press releases a month. Your release must telegraph the news in the first five seconds of reading.

But what makes for a news story? It depends on your industry and your audience. Forbes and Fortune would not consider publication of your new ball-bearing catalog to be news. But the editors of Machine Design, Design News, and other trade magazines whose readers use ball bearings might very well run a short news release on the catalog and a picture of its cover.

One thing that is not news is advertising and promotion. Editors will not publish descriptive stories about your product, service, or organization unless the story tells them something new or provides service information useful to the publication’s readers.

A press release with the headline, “Ajax Dry Cleaners Provides Top-Quality Cleaning at Reasonable Prices” will not generate any coverage. But if Ajax sent out a release titled “Ajax Dry Cleaners Offers Expert Advice on How to Remove Tough Stains,” editors might reprint the advice as a how-to article. Ajax gets publicity by being listed as the source of the expert advice.

Here is a list of possible topics for news releases about your company. They all hold interest because they contain either news or useful information, or both. You can write a press release about:

A new product

An old product with a new name or package

A product improvement

A new version or model of an old product

An old product available in new materials, colors, or sizes

A new application of an old product

New accessories available for an old product

The publication of new or revised sales literature—brochures, catalogs, data sheets, surveys, reports, reprints, white papers

A speech or presentation given by an executive

An expert opinion on any subject

A controversial issue

New employees

Promotions within the firm

Awards and honors won by your organization or its employees

Original discoveries or innovations (such as patents)

New stores, branch offices, headquarters, facilities

New sales reps, distributors, agents

Major contracts awarded to your firm

Joint ventures

Management reorganization

Major achievements, such as number of products sold, increase in sales, quarterly earnings, safety record

Unusual people, products, ways of doing business

Case histories of successful applications, installations, projects

Tips and hints (“how-to” advice)

Change of company name, slogan, or logo

Opening of a new business

Special events such as a sale, party, open house, plant tour, contest, or sweepstakes

Charitable acts or other community relations



The only type of press release that does not need to contain news is the “background release,” or “backgrounder.” Backgrounders present a brief overview of your company.

Even though the backgrounder is not, strictly speaking, a news story, you should try to put something new, or at least some little-known fact or startling piece of information, in the backgrounders you write. This will grab an editor’s interest more strongly than a bland summary of your organizational chart.

Another special type of press release is the “fact sheet.” Fact sheets contain detailed information, usually in list form, too lengthy to be included in the body of the main release.

A press release announcing the opening of a new gourmet food store might be distributed with a fact sheet listing recipes for three or four of the store’s specialties. A fact sheet for a consulting firm could contain a list of clients or brief biographies of the firm’s principals.

Often copywriters are faced with a client who wants publicity and asks us to write a press release but has nothing new to report. In such instances, a creative publicist or copywriter can “manufacture” a hook or angle strong enough to gain the media’s attention.

For instance, when Jericho Communications, a New York City PR firm, was looking for a way to gain publicity for its client Domino’s Pizza, someone said, “When we work late at night, we order pizza. Maybe the White House does the same thing. Can we see whether pizza deliveries to the White House increase when there is a national emergency?”

Sure enough, they did. And Jericho created the “Pizza Meter,” publicizing the fact that you could judge the state of the nation by the volume of pizza delivery to the White House. The tactic was successful, garnering major media coverage for the pizza maker.

When Giga Pets were the rage, my then seven-year-old son dropped his into the toilet and was upset that it “died” (the water shorted out the electronics). To make him feel better, we buried the Giga Pet in our backyard and held a mock funeral, which gave me an idea for some PR.

I sent out the press release below, and within a week a major New Jersey newspaper did a large feature article on our “Giga Pet cemetery” (please don’t send for the booklet, which I lost track of long ago).

FROM: Microchip Gardens, 174 Holland Avenue, New Milford, NJ 07646

CONTACT: Bob Bly, phone 973-263-0562

For immediate release

MICROCHIP GARDENS, WORLD’S FIRST “GIGAPET CEMETERY,” OPENS IN NORTHERN NJ

When 7-year-old Alex Bly’s Giga Pet died after he dropped it in the toilet, he couldn’t find a place to bury it. So his father, NJ-based entrepreneur Bob Bly, created Microchip Gardens—the world’s first Giga Pet cemetery—in the family’s suburban backyard.

Now if your child’s Giga Pet dies and can’t be revived, instead of unceremoniously tossing it in the trash, you can give it a proper burial in a beautiful, tree-lined resting place.

For fees starting at $5, based on plot location and method of interment (burial, mausoleum, cremation), Bly will give your dearly departed Giga Pet an eternal resting place in Microchip Gardens, complete with funeral service and burial certificate.

“Even Giga Pets don’t last forever,” said Bly. “There are pet cemeteries for dogs and cats; now Giga Pets have one, too.”

To help owners get the most pleasure from Giga Pet ownership, Bly—author of 35 published books including The “I Hate Kathie Lee Gifford” Book (Kensington) and The Ultimate Unauthorized Star Trek Quiz Book (HarperCollins)—has written an informative new booklet, “Raising Your Giga Pet.”

The booklet covers such topics as purchasing your first Giga Pet; taking the pet home; care and feeding; and play and discipline. Giga Pet burial rituals and the origins of Microchip Gardens are also covered.

To get your copy of “Raising Your Giga Pet,” which includes complete information on the Microchip Gardens Giga Pet cemetery, send $4 to: CTC, 22 E. Quackenbush Avenue, Dumont, NJ 07628.





QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ABOUT PRESS RELEASES


Here are some questions I’m frequently asked by companies that are just getting into public relations:

Q: What’s the best length for a press release?

A: For a new product release, one to two pages. If you have a lot to tell, three pages is acceptable. But certainly no longer than that.

Case histories and backgrounders usually run longer; three to five pages is average. If it takes more than five pages to tell your story, make it a feature article, not a press release.

Q: Is it better if the release comes from a PR firm or straight from the company?

A: What counts is not who wrote the release, but whether the release contains interesting news clearly presented. Some people have a theory that editors are wary of dealing with public relations people and prefer to go straight to the source. I know a few editors who feel this way. But the majority don’t.

Q: How do I reproduce the release?

A: Offset printing is best and doesn’t cost very much. Photocopies are acceptable if they are crisp, sharp, and free of smudges or streaks. Or you can run off copies on your laser printer. Today, most releases are distributed electronically.

Q: Do I need to send a photo out with my release?

A: It’s helpful but not mandatory. An interesting photo of a product, person, plant, process, or package will heighten the editor’s interest. Remember, most magazines and papers publish pictures as well as words.

Paste a few of your most interesting photos in the body of the e-mail, and also offer to send them as 300 dpi color images in a separate file the editor can request. If the photo files are too large, send in a Dropbox.

Q: What’s the best way to distribute a press release?

A: The basic methods are postal mail and online, with most marketers using the latter.

Do not send a press release or any other copy as an attached e-mail file to an editor who does not know you and is not expecting it; the editor will delete it without opening it for fear of catching malware or a computer virus. When in doubt, call editors prior to sending your release and ask how they prefer to receive materials.





WRITING A FEATURE ARTICLE


Copywriters also get called upon to “ghostwrite” full-length feature stories for trade and business publications.

Take a look at some trade journals. They contain many articles written by outside contributors: scientists, engineers, managers, and other professionals employed by companies.

These contributors write not for pay (most trade journals pay a small honorarium or nothing at all) but to promote their own careers as well as the companies they work for. Many companies have a regular scheduled program of placing feature articles in magazines. And they hire professional writers to ghostwrite these articles.

Another option is to post the article on your blog. Include a link to a page with more detail on the subject matter. Opinions on optimal blog length vary, but 500 to 1,000 words is common.

Although each article is different, there are four basic types of articles that magazines publish:





1. Case Histories


A case history article is a product “success story.” It tells the story of how a product, service, or system was helpful to a specific customer.

Case history reporting derives its effectiveness from the principle that what works for one customer might work for others. Case histories are effective, too, because they’re credible. They deal in specifics rather than in claims or generalities. Finally, case histories are an inherently storytelling approach to selling.

Here’s how a typical case history article gets started. A telephone manufacturer installs a new office phone system in a customer’s sales office. The office manager finds that the new system has increased the productivity of the sales force by 25 percent and cut phone bills in half.

When the telephone manufacturer gets wind of this, he asks the office manager or other company executive if he can write up this success story and place it with an appropriate trade journal. If the manager agrees, the telephone manufacturer hires a writer.

The writer interviews the office manager at the sales firm and writes the story. After it is approved, it is submitted to the magazine and published. The byline may be that of the manufacturer, the manager, the magazine editor, or the writer. It depends on the nature of the article.





2. How-to Articles


These provide useful information that helps the reader do something better (“How to Choose the Right Lighting for Your Small Business,” “Seven Ways to Cut Energy Costs,” “A Guide to Ball-Bearing Selection”). How-to articles are also known as “tutorials,” perhaps because they tutor the reader in a new skill or area of knowledge.

The how-to article is content marketing (see chapter 17). It does not discuss your product directly (your company shouldn’t even be mentioned, except in the byline). Instead, it promotes you indirectly by establishing your firm’s reputation as a leader in the field. Readers tend to clip and save how-to articles. So, although your article may not generate immediate business, some people will keep it and call on you when the need arises.





3. Issue Articles


In issue articles, industry experts speak out on some topical, controversial, or technical issue of the day. These articles help strengthen your company’s image as a leader in its field. Example: “Should Internet Users Be Prosecuted for Illegal Downloading of Movies, Music, and Other Copyrighted Materials?”





4. News


News articles are usually prepared by staff editors and reporters, not outsiders. Occasionally, though, a corporation with big news to report—a merger, an acquisition, a revolutionary new invention—will work with a reporter to develop a feature story. The reporter gets a scoop, while the company gets good press.





QUERY LETTERS


The first step in getting a feature story published in a magazine is to get an editor interested in the article topic. This means first suggesting the topic to the editor, either in a phone conversation or by letter, usually sent today as an e-mail.

Some editors will listen to your pitch over the phone. Most want to see the idea written up in a short proposal known as a “query letter.” This is a one- or two-page outline, in letter form, of the article you propose to write.

The query letter explains what the article is about, what your “angle” is, why the magazine’s readers will be interested in the article, and what makes you qualified to write it. The letter is also a demonstration of your writing style. Boring query letters rarely result in an article assignment, because the editor assumes your article will be as boring as your letter.

Here is a sample of a query that got me an assignment to write an article for Amtrak Express:

Mr. James A. Frank, Editor

AMTRAK EXPRESS

34 East 51st Street

New York, NY 10022

Dear Mr. Frank:

Is this letter a waste of paper?

Yes—if it fails to get the desired result.

In business, most letters and memos are written to generate a specific response—close a sale, set up a meeting, get a job interview, make a contact. Many of these letters fail to do their job.

Part of the problem is that business executives and support staff don’t know how to write persuasively. The solution is a formula first discovered by advertising copywriters—a formula called AIDA. AIDA stands for Attention, Interest, Desire, Action.

First, the letter gets attention … with a hard-hitting lead paragraph that goes straight to the point, or offers an element of intrigue.

Then, the letter hooks the reader’s interest. The hook is often a clear statement of the reader’s problems, her needs, her desires. If you are writing to a customer who received damaged goods, state the problem. And then promise a solution.

Next, create desire. You are offering something—a service, a product, an agreement, a contract, a compromise, a consultation. Tell the reader the benefit he’ll receive from your offering. Create a demand for your product.

Finally, call for action. Ask for the order, the signature, the check, the go-ahead.

I’d like to give you a 1,500-word article on “How to Write Letters That Get Results.” The piece will illustrate the AIDA formula with a variety of actual letters and memos from insurance companies, banks, manufacturers, and other organizations.

This letter, too, was written to get a specific result—an article assignment from the editor of Amtrak Express.

Did it succeed?

Regards,

Bob Bly

P.S. By way of introduction, I’m an advertising consultant and the author of Technical Writing: Structure, Standards, and Style (McGraw-Hill).



Editors usually respond to query letters within a month or so. (If a month goes by and you haven’t heard, follow up with another letter or a phone call.)

A positive response to a query is, “Your proposed article idea interests us. Send a manuscript.” This means the editor wants to see the article. It doesn’t mean a promise to publish it. The editor won’t make that decision until after reading it. A positive response to a query letter is no guarantee that your article will be printed.

If the editor turns down your proposal, you can send your query letter to other publications. Few article ideas are restricted to one magazine only. Most are appropriate for at least half a dozen publications or more.

In the twenty-first century, most publications want to receive digital queries. They either provide an e-mail address on their site to where you can send your query or else have an online submission form for proposing article ideas. When sent via e-mail, the query letter is pasted into the body of the e-mail, not transmitted as an e-mail attachment.





HOW TO WRITE A SPEECH


Business and association executives don’t always communicate by writing articles. Sometimes they make speeches. And, as with article writing, executives often hire ghostwriters to write their speeches for them.

When I got my first speech-writing assignment, I was paralyzed with fear because I had no idea how long—in minutes or words—a speech should be.

Now I do. The average speaker speaks at a rate of 120 words a minute. It follows that a twenty-minute speech should be 2,400 words long.

For lunch and dinner talks, many speeches are brief, about twenty minutes. Less seems insubstantial. More can get boring. No speech, no matter how important, should last more than an hour.

Every speech should have a clear-minded purpose. Most speeches are given to entertain, to teach, to persuade, or to inspire.

Speeches are effective at getting across ideas, opinions, and emotions. They are less effective at transmitting a large body of facts (print is the appropriate medium for that).

Here are some additional tips for writing speeches that accomplish their goals without boring the audience to tears:





1. Find Out What the Speaker Wants to Say


Few writing assignments are as personal or as idiosyncratic as writing someone else’s speech. You’ll avoid headaches if you take the time to know the speaker’s requirements before you sit down to write.

“You have to ask the right questions of your client to prepare a speech that he’ll deliver as if he really means it,” writes freelancer Nancy Edmonds Hanson. “Sometimes a lengthy discussion of the topic is necessary before the client himself clarifies his position on it. Your job is to probe, to ask him to carry his own thoughts a little further until he’s worked the topic through in his own mind.”

Interviews with the client reveal the basic thrust of the speech and provide most of the facts. Information gaps can be filled in through library research or by browsing through the client’s private files on the subject.





2. Know Your Audience


Learn as much as you can about the group you’ll be speaking to. This will help you tailor your talk to their specific interests. For example, a speech on podcasting should be geared toward the professional interests of the audience. Engineers are interested in the technology: how it works. Advertising executives want to know more about podcasting as a marketing medium.





3. Write a Strong Opening


The first sentence uttered by the speaker is like the headline of an advertisement or the lead paragraph of a direct-mail piece. An engaging opening grabs attention and gets the audience enthusiastic about your topic. A sample speech introduction:

Today, I would like to share with you some of my innermost thoughts and memories, which have been locked away deep in my heart for the longest time. It has been seven years since the passing of my husband, Joseph. This is the first time many of these memories and thoughts will see the light of day. I have agreed to speak with you today in order to impress upon you the importance of Sephardic Bikur Holim (SBH) and what it meant to my children. My story starts with something we all know, yet very rarely face, and that is how vulnerable we all really are.

Joseph was a wonderful husband, a caring father, and a successful businessman. He had such a passion for helping others, and he took the plight of the unfortunate very personally. He was instrumental in making SBH the organization that it is today, and it was always his dream to become a social worker. To me it seemed like a natural progression for Joseph to trade in his business career for college life.





4. Then, There’s Humor


Speechwriters are always uncertain when it comes to using humor. They know that humor can quickly warm an audience to the speaker. But a joke that bombs can ruin the whole talk.

My advice is to pepper the speech with little tidbits of warm, gentle, good-natured humor. Not big gags, old jokes, or nightclub-comic routines. Just a few well-chosen, humorous comments that make the speaker seem a bit more human. Audiences respond well to self-effacing humor.

Leading off with a prepared joke is risky. Often jokes fall flat, because what is funny to some people is not to others. Worse, some audience members may think you are there to clown and have nothing important to say.





5. Don’t Try to Cover Too Much


Remember, a twenty-minute speech has only 2,400 words. Also, the spoken word is often not quite as compact as written English. Therefore, there’s only so much information you can put in your talk.

Don’t try to cover your whole subject. Just break off a little piece of it and tell your story with warmth, wit, humor, and authority. Delete trivial information and limit your talk to the important key points.

For example, “Your Career” is too broad a topic for a speech. “How to Start Your Own Digital Agency” is a more manageable subject for an after-dinner talk.





6. Write in a Conversational Tone


Speeches are to be heard, not read. A speech is one person talking, and it should sound like talking, not like an academic thesis or a corporate memorandum.

Write in a conversational tone. That means short words. Short sentences. Plenty of contractions. Even a colloquial expression every now and then.

The best test of a speech is to read the draft aloud. If it doesn’t sound natural, rewrite it until it does.

Use bullets, headings, and numbers to divide the speech into sections. The speaker can catch her breath during the pauses between sections.

If the copy can’t be broken up this way, then indicate places where the speaker can pause between paragraphs. These stops give nervous speakers a chance to slow down.





7. Keep It Simple


A speech is not the appropriate medium for delivering complex ideas and sophisticated theories.

For one thing, a speech is limited in the amount of information it can contain. For another, the listener can’t stop to ponder a point or go back to information presented earlier (as he can when reading an article, ad, or brochure).

Ideally, your speech should be centered around one main point or theme. If a fact or observation doesn’t tie in with this point, throw it out.

Give the listener easy-to-grasp tidbits of information and advice. Don’t try to get the audience to follow a rigorous mathematical proof, a complex argument, or a complicated process. They won’t.





8. What About Visuals?


When I worked in the corporate world in the 1970s, slides were the rage. No speaker would think of giving a presentation without a carousel full of brightly colored slides to back him up. Today, PowerPoint presentations run on laptops and are projected onto screens large enough for everyone in the audience to see.

In some cases, visuals can be useful. If you want to introduce the new corporate logo, you must show a visual of it; words alone can’t adequately describe a graphic concept.

Avoid making text slides too wordy, as the more text on the slide, the smaller the words will appear on the screen. A good rule of thumb is to have a maximum of five bullets per slide with no more than five words per bullet.





9. Handouts


At conferences, attendees often get a thick binder containing the PowerPoint presentations from all of the speakers. When speaking to local groups, a reprint of an article you wrote makes a good handout. Or you can distribute a sheet summarizing your key points.





10. Pick a Catchy Title for Your Speech


When you speak, you’ll lead off with the first sentence, not the title. But the title will be used in mailings, flyers, and other promotions aimed at attracting an audience for your talk. The name of your speech can make the difference between an empty house and an attentive crowd.

“Effective Management of Overseas Trade Show Exhibits” is a boring title. “How to Set Up a Booth at a Japanese Electronics Show—And Live to Tell About It” is much more enticing.





WRITING PROMOTIONAL NEWSLETTERS


Many organizations publish newsletters that they distribute free to customers, clients, prospects, employees, journal editors, and decision makers in their industries.

Most companies today use e-newsletters distributed as e-mails. They work. But a minority of marketers mail traditional paper newsletters (fig. 9.1). Because of their rarity, they stand out more than the electronic kind.

Whether you use print or digital, the stories in these newsletters are similar in tone and content to the press releases and feature stories I’ve discussed—only the articles are usually shorter. Newsletters are designed to promote, either directly or indirectly, the organization and its activities, services, or products.

The newsletter has less credibility than a story appearing in a magazine or on major media Web sites, because readers know it is self-published by the firm. On the other hand, a company can use the newsletter to say whatever it wants without fear of being censored, rewritten, or misquoted by an editor.

Newsletters build your image and reputation with a select group of prospects (those who receive the newsletter) over a period of time.

Fig. 9.1: Copywriter’s rough layout of a two-sided, 8½ x 11–inch newsletter.



Many clients start out with ambitious plans to publish the newsletter on a regular basis—every quarter, every other month, every month. But when media costs run over budget for the new Facebook ad campaign, the marketing manager may make up the difference by skipping an issue or two of his newsletter.

Companies try to lure freelancers and agencies to do their newsletters for a low price with the logic, “It’s not as key as advertising or online videos, so we can’t afford to spend a lot. But we’ll make up the difference with volume, since it’s a steady thing.”

Writers and agencies should approach newsletters with caution. Often a promised assignment of six newsletters turns into two.

The typical print promotional newsletter is four pages long. Text is set in two or three columns, and there is little or no white space. There are three or four major feature stories (about 200 to 500 words each), a few short items (two to three paragraphs), and a number of photos with captions.

Most of the stories are not written especially for the newsletter but come from other sources: press releases, condensed feature articles, speeches, case histories, sales literature, ad campaigns, social media posts, and webinars. In this way, the newsletter gives additional exposure to messages you’re communicating in other media.

For instance, a bank published a newsletter called “As a Matter of Fact: A Consumer Newsletter with Money Facts for You.” It was available from a rack display at local branches and filled with helpful information on personal finance. Articles included “The Mortgage Maze,” “The 10% Factor … the Facts Behind Withholding Taxes on Interest,” “Recovering from the Recession,” and “The Pathway to Investing.”

The relationship between a bank and its customers is based on trust. By providing investment counseling at no cost through its newsletter, the bank was helping to cement that relationship.

A local supermarket published a four-page newsletter on food, available at the checkout counter. It contained tips on nutrition, exercise, food shopping, and cooking. Each issue also featured a number of recipes.

By helping me exercise and eat right, the supermarket gained my goodwill. By giving me recipes, it got me to come into the store to buy more food.





A CHECKLIST OF NEWSLETTER STORY IDEAS


The above examples give you an idea of the types of stories published in promotional newsletters. The checklist below can serve as a source of ideas for putting together your own newsletter:

News

Explanatory articles (“how it works”)

Product stories

Case histories

Background information

How to solve a problem

Technical tips for using the product

General how-to information and advice

Do’s and don’ts

Industry updates

Employee news

Employee profiles

Community relations news

Financial news

Roundup of recent sales activities

Interviews and profiles

Letters column

Announcements or write-ups of conferences, seminars, trade shows, meetings

Photos with captions

Product selection guides

Checklists



As mentioned, today, many companies are distributing their promotional newsletters online, either in addition to or as a replacement for a printed customer newsletter. For specific guidelines on writing and publishing online newsletters, see chapter 13.





10



WRITING TV AND RADIO COMMERCIALS



Today, with hundreds of TV and streaming video channels, more commercials are competing for our attention than ever before. The challenge is to make your commercial stand out from the rest and attract the consumer’s attention. But advertisers are unsure as to how to do this.

One school believes that the “creative” approach is the solution to TV’s clutter. Dramatic stories, fast-paced action, surreal fantasy landscapes, animation, humor, computer graphics, the “new wave” look, and other techniques are used to give commercials distinct graphic appeal—often, in my opinion, at the expense of the sales pitch. These commercials stand out, but they don’t sell, because they tend to ignore the product and its appeal to the consumer.

A second school embraces old-fashioned values. Its adherents believe that simple commercials, with honest and straightforward presentations of the product and its benefits, are what convince consumers to write checks and open wallets. One example is the spots for OxiClean Stain Remover. They are persuasive because they demonstrate the product, which catches your attention. Also effective are the TV commercials for My Pillow, where the company owner and inventor of the pillow enthusiastically explains and demonstrates the product’s superiority to ordinary store-bought pillows.

Many advertising experts are rising to defend the straightforward approach to TV commercials. Faith Popcorn, futurist and founder of BrainReserve, says we’re moving into an age of product intelligence, in which consumers will demand real information, “real sell.” She predicted this decades ago, and the rise of content marketing seems to have proven her right.

In the content marketing era, many people take things in through information. Browse the shelves of your local bookstore; you’ll find that “how-to” and straight informational-type books dominate the publishing industry. What’s more, the authors of these books don’t resort to trickery, grandstanding, or gimmicks—they tell their story through a straightforward presentation of the facts. They know that the real customer for their book is someone who wants and needs the information it contains.

And so it is with products. The serious prospect is an information seeker; she wants to be well informed before she spends her hard-earned dollars. Too many commercials waste their effort pitching to the nonprospect, someone who is unlikely to turn into a paying customer.

Advertisers emulate the showmanship and production values of Hollywood feature films in their efforts to get these nonprospects to watch their commercials. They forget that the goal is not to get people to watch, but to get people to buy or to prefer one brand to another. Long ago, David Ogilvy and other advertising pioneers proved there is no correlation between a person liking a commercial and being sold by it.

“I have wondered often if ‘creativity’ doesn’t sometimes get in the way of believability,” Advertising Age columnist Sid Bernstein once wrote in a column on TV commercials. “I have a feeling that what we really need is more simplicity. More simple, honest selling. More dignity more clarity. Less confusion … less emphasis on sensational entertainment and more emphasis on making a sensible buy.”

On the other hand, Ogilvy famously said, “You can’t bore people into buying your product.” What seems to be working today is “edutainment,” a term so named because it combines education (information) with entertainment.





THE 12 TYPES OF COMMERCIALS


I’ve always thought writing fiction was an original act, one that didn’t fit into a formula.

But in a class on screenwriting, the instructor surprised us by saying, “I know you think what you’ve written is very special. But people who write and produce films have documented just thirty-six dramatic situations. All screenplays can be put in one of these categories.” She listed some of the categories as revolution, madness, crimes of love, ambition, remorse, disaster, and adultery.

Although TV commercials seemingly offer infinite variety, there are fewer TV commercial formats than there are screenplay situations. Twelve of these are described below.





1. Demonstrations


Demonstrations show how a product works. If you are selling a food processor, you show how quickly and easily it slices, dices, blends, and mixes.

Demonstrations are effective for comparing two products. On the left of the screen, you show how sticky and dull most car waxes are. On the right, you show how easily your wax goes on, how brightly it shines, and how it repels water like a duck.

A commercial for a pool chlorinator showed a woman sitting by a pool as the voice-over told how crystal clear the chlorinator makes pool water. Suddenly, the woman shoots up through the water. We find out she was actually in the pool and that the commercial was shot underwater, dramatically demonstrating the clarity of water treated with the product being advertised.





2. Testimonials


Testimonials are used to add credibility to a claim. People more readily believe praise for a product when it comes from a customer or a third party rather than the manufacturer.

Some of the most effective testimonials are those featuring real people who use and like the product. Real people are more believable than paid actors or “staged” interviews. To get genuine testimonials from real product users, commercial producers use hidden cameras to film reactions to product use and answers to questions.

Many advertisers pay celebrities to endorse their products, reasoning that celebrities draw attention and that people hang on their every word.

Commercial makers do agree that a celebrity must be right for the product. Britney Spears generated excitement for Pepsi but would be less appropriate for investment banking commercials. Marie Osmond does Weight Watchers. Peyton Manning is featured on Nationwide Insurance TV spots.





3. Stand-up Presenter


In this type of commercial, an actor stands before the camera and delivers a straightforward sales pitch on the virtues of the product.

The stand-up presenter, also known as a “talking head” or “pitchman,” can be especially effective when the sales pitch you have is so strong that it doesn’t need to be gussied up. Alex Trebek is a stand-up presenter for Colonial Life and also reverse mortgages. Because it is a direct response commercial, the results can be measured. And it must be working. Otherwise, these expensive spots would not have run so often.





4. Slice of Life


The slice of life is a miniature play centering around two or more people and a story involving the product. In one toothpaste commercial, a little boy in pajamas is teary-eyed. He is sad because Mom scolded him for not brushing his teeth. Dad explains that Mom is not mad but concerned for his health: brushing will give him a mouth full of pearly white, cavity-free teeth. The little boy smiles and laughs; Mom loves him after all.





5. Lifestyle Advertising


A lifestyle commercial focuses on the user and how the product fits into his lifestyle. Corona beer features young, fit teens on the beach having fun with good friends, portraying a relaxed, easygoing lifestyle. Commercials for assisted living facilities for the elderly, as well as active adult communities you can buy in to as early as age fifty, portray them as pleasant living environments offering both companionship and activities.

Note: If you are going to use still photos or videos showing actors depicting your target market, use actors or models who are about ten years younger and weigh ten pounds less than real people in your demographic. Reason: people like to think of themselves as younger-looking and slimmer than they really are or else aspire to be like the guy or gal in the picture.





6. Animation


Animation—cartoons—is effective in selling to children, especially when featuring popular cartoon characters. Animation aimed at adults ditches the cartoon characters for the most part, simply showing the actions that would normally be portrayed by live actors as animation.





7. Jingles


A jingle is an advertising slogan set to music. Famous jingles of the past include McDonald’s “You Deserve a Break Today,” Pepsi’s “Catch That Pepsi Spirit,” and Diet Coke’s “You’re Gonna Drink It Just for the Taste of It.” The best jingles implant slogans in people’s minds by setting the slogans to catchy, memorable tunes that people just can’t stop humming or singing. Farmers Insurance has a signature semi-jingle that goes like this: “We are Farmers; dum-de-dum-dum-dum-dum-DUM.”





8. Visual as Hero


Some advertisers treat commercial making as filmmaking, not as selling. They produce mini-feature films with color and visual quality that surpasses most television shows and motion pictures. An example of this was the auto commercial for the Turbo Z. The action took place in a steamy, dark “city of the future” reminiscent of the science-fiction film Blade Runner.

Unusual graphic treatments can glue viewers to the set. But do these far-out entertainments sell products? I haven’t read any articles or case studies that say they do.





9. Humor


Funny commercials are in (e.g., “No can left behind” for Pepsi Max). We know many people enjoy funny commercials. Whether they are sold by them is another story. In fact, a common problem with funny and other entertaining commercials is that immediately after viewing them, often the consumers can’t name the product being advertising—because the commercial, not the product, was made the center of attention.

Very few copywriters are able to write humorous copy. And when a funny commercial falls flat, it becomes a sales disaster. Unless you are 99.9 percent sure that you are funny (and that your audience will think so, too), avoid the funny commercial. What is funny to one viewer is foolish to another.





10. Continuing Characters


The use of a continuing character—a fictional person who appears in a series of commercials and print ads—is extremely effective in building recognition of a brand. Successful fictional characters include Mr. Whipple, the Jolly Green Giant, Aunt Bluebell, Mr. Goodwrench, the Maytag Repairman, the Keebler Elves, and the Pillsbury Doughboy. If you create a fictional character that captures the public’s fancy, use him continuously and heavily until research or sales show that your customers are tiring of him. In recent years, this style seems to have declined in usage.

Sometimes the recurring character is the company owner, such as Jimmy Dean for his sausages and the Purdue family for their chickens. Others can be actors such as the woman for Popeye’s or Patrick Warburton for National Car Rentals or Peyton Manning for Nationwide Insurance.





11. Reason-Why Copy


Reason-why copy lists the reasons why people should buy the product. A commercial for Hebrew National Franks showed people eating and enjoying hot dogs while the voice-over narration listed the reasons why people like to eat the franks. Reason-why commercials can be effective, although reason-why copy seems to work better in print than on the air.





12. Emotion


Commercials that use nostalgia, charm, or sentimentality to tug at your heartstrings (and your wallet) can be both memorable and persuasive. In a Budweiser commercial created for the Super Bowl, the spot shows the affection between a horse trainer and a horse he raised from a foal, which he sells to Budweiser. At a parade, where the trainer is in a crowd as a spectator, the horse, now one of the Budweiser horses, sees the trainer. He breaks away from the parade, runs in the opposite direction to where the trainer is standing, and they have what is clearly an emotional reunion.

Like humor, genuine emotional copy can be difficult to write. If you can do it, more power to you. Most copywriters have a better shot sticking to demonstrations, pitchmen, testimonials, and other “straight-sell” formats.





TIPS ON WRITING TV SPOTS


Here are some tips on writing TV commercials that are arresting, memorable, and persuasive:

•  TV is primarily a medium of pictures, not words. Be sure your pictures deliver a selling message. If you can’t figure out what is being sold when the sound is turned off, the commercial is not as strong as it could be.

•  However, sight and sound must work together. Words should explain what the pictures are showing.

•  Viewers can take in a limited amount of sight and sound in 30 or 60 seconds; direct response commercials (DRTV) often run 120 seconds, or thirty minutes for infomercials. So, if your sales pitch requires a barrage of words, keep the pictures simple. On the other hand, if you use complex graphics, keep the words to a minimum. Viewers can’t handle a dazzling visual display and a fast-talking announcer at the same time.

•  Think about your customer—the guy or gal in front of the television. Is your commercial interesting and important enough to stop your customer from getting up and going to the refrigerator or the bathroom?

•  Plan your commercial within existing budgetary limitations. Special effects, jingles, actors, animation, computer graphics, and shooting on location make the cost of commercials skyrocket. Only the stand-up presenter and straightforward, in-the-studio product demonstration are relatively inexpensive to produce.

•  Make sure the lead of your commercial is a real grabber. The first four seconds of a commercial are like the headline of a print ad; they decide whether the viewer will sit through your presentation or fix a snack. Open with something irresistible: snappy music, an arresting visual, a dramatic situation, a real-life problem.

•  If you are selling a product that can be purchased off the supermarket shelf, show the label. Use close-ups to draw attention to the package. People will buy the product later if they remember the package from your commercial.

•  Use motion. Video, unlike slide shows, is a medium of motion. Show cars driving, maple syrup pouring, airplanes flying, popcorn popping, club soda fizzing. Avoid stagnant commercials. Keep it moving.

•  Also, don’t forget that television offers sound as well as pictures. Let the viewer hear the car engine roaring, the pancakes frying, the airplane whooshing, the popcorn popping, the club soda fizzing, the ice cubes plopping into a cold, tall drink. Many people find the sound of sizzling bacon more appetizing than the look. (Smell may be even more appetizing, but television with smell is not yet a reality. Nor do I know of any manufacturers who are developing such a device.)

•  Use “supers.” These are titles, in white type, superimposed over the picture. The super reinforces a sales point made in the commercial or makes an additional point not covered in the spoken narration. If you are selling vitamins by mail, put up a super that says, “NOT AVAILABLE IN STORES.” People will not buy from a mail-order commercial if they think they can get the product in a store.

•  Repeat the product name and the main selling point at least twice. There are two reasons why you should do this. First, repetition aids the viewer in remembering the product. Second, many viewers may not have been paying attention during the beginning of your commercial, so you want to make sure they know who you are and what you are selling.

•  Don’t neglect the product. Show people eating it, wearing it, riding it, using it, enjoying it. Demonstrate the product. Have people talk about how good the product is. Apply proven techniques of print advertising to television, and you will be delighted with the results.

•  If you want viewers to call or write in to order a product or request more information, announce this at the beginning of the commercial (“Get paper and pencil ready to take advantage of this special TV offer…”). Few people keep a notepad handy while they watch TV. So use phone numbers and URLs that are easy to remember.

•  If you use celebrities (either on camera or in voice-over), identify the celebrity with a voice-over introduction or superimposed title. A large number of people will not recognize celebrities unless you identify them. And they will not be impressed or swayed by the celebrities unless they are well known.

•  In local retail commercials, give the address and clear directions to the store.

•  The four basic commercial lengths are 10, 30, 60, and 120 seconds. Ten-second commercials are usually “ID” or identification spots. ID spots just drive home a product name and support the campaign’s 30- or 60-second spots.

•  Because time is limited, a commercial should stick to one main thought or sales point: flame broiling beats frying; Midas installs more mufflers than anyone else; Verizon’s network is more reliable than Sprint’s; Apple makes the sleekest and most advanced smartphones.





FORMATTING THE SCRIPT


The manuscript format for TV commercials is simple: video (pictures) is typed on the left, audio (words and sound effects) is typed on the right.

What’s important is writing a good commercial. Don’t worry about the technical terms. You’ll learn them when you need to, but they are not essential. All that counts is that your commercial is arresting, memorable, and persuasive.

Here are just a few of the basic terms to help get you started:

ANNCR—Announcer. The narrator of the commercial.

CU—Close-up. An extremely tight shot in which a single object, such as a package label, dominates the screen.

LS—Long shot. A shot of a distant subject.

MS—Medium shot. A shot of the subject in the foreground, showing a substantial amount of the scenery behind it.

SFX—Sound effects. Background sound other than human voice or musical instruments.

TS—Tight shot. A shot leaving little or no space around the subject.

VO—Voice-over. The voice of an off-camera narrator.

The commercial below is typed in proper commercial manuscript format. It’s also a good example of straightforward copy packed with product benefits.

Writer: Amy Bly

Product: Galantine Chicken (30 seconds)

VIDEO:

AUDIO:



1. MS to CU: Golden brown Galantine chicken on platter.

1. ANNCR: (VO): You’re looking at a plump, juicy Galantine chicken. But this is no ordinary chicken. Because we’ve taken out the bones.



2. MS: Man slicing chicken. One-quarter to one-third of meat is already sliced on platter.

2. You can slice right through it …



3. CU: Array of chicken dishes on buffet table.

3. Prepare any number of delicious chicken dishes, from chicken scampi to chicken salad, quickly and easily, without having to cut around bones.



4. MS: Smiling family eating chicken.

4. A Galantine chicken costs a bit more than an ordinary chicken.



5. CU: Fully sliced chicken on platter.

5. But then there’s no waste. You get one hundred percent meat.



6. CU: Packaged chicken, showing Galantine name and logo.

6. So if you have a bone to pick with ordinary chicken, try Galantine instead. At your butcher’s and at fine grocers everywhere.



There are a number of things I like about this commercial:

1. It’s simple—easy to take in—and inexpensive to produce.

2. The visuals show the product, a demonstration of the product (easy slicing of boneless chicken), people enjoying the product, and the package—all in thirty seconds.

3. The narration tells us the unique selling feature of the chicken (no bones), the benefits of this feature (slice right through it, no waste, quick and easy), and shows what you can do with the product (prepare any number of dishes).

4. The ending (“if you have a bone to pick with ordinary chicken”) is a clever play on words that leaves a smile on your face. And it tells you where you can buy the product.

Here’s another effective thirty-second spot from the same writer:

Writer: Amy Bly

Product: YOURS beer for women (30 seconds)

VIDEO:

AUDIO:



1. MS: Well-dressed couple sitting in fancy restaurant. Man reaches for bottle of beer on table. Woman slaps his hand away playfully.

1. WOMAN: Hey, that’s YOURS!



2. MS: Man’s face. He looks over at her, puzzled, grinning.

2. MAN: If it’s mine, why can’t I have it?



3. TS: Woman’s finger pointing at label on bottle.

3. WOMAN: Because YOURS is the beer that’s made for women only.



4. MS: Woman pouring beer.

4. SFX: Beer being poured into glass. ANNCR: YOURS is bubbly, light, and has fewer calories than ordinary beer.



5. MS: Woman finishes pouring beer and picks up glass.

5. ANNCR: And, it comes in convenient ten-ounce bottles that pour one perfect glass of beer … enough to quench your thirst without filling you up.



6. MS: Man reaching for glass of beer.

6. MAN: Why can’t I have YOURS?



7. MS: Woman pulls glass away, smiling.

7. WOMAN: ’Cause it’s mine …



8. TS: Bottle of YOURS against black background.

8. ANNCR: (VO): YOURS … the first beer for women only.



This is basically a lifestyle commercial combined with a presentation of product benefits. YOURS is a beer for women who eat in fancy restaurants, dress well, and have attractive, personable dinner companions. You can picture Cameron Diaz and Dy