lan McDermott playing the upscale duo.

Other things I like about the script:

1. It is fun, humorous, and playful. But all the playfulness is relevant to the product!

2. The product has a strong position: “The first beer for women only.”

3. The commercial highlights product features that would appeal to women: light, few calories, small servings per bottle.

4. The name is repeated five times and the label shown twice.





HOW TO WRITE RADIO COMMERCIALS


Radio is different from TV and print. And the difference is threefold. First, the radio spot may be prerecorded by professional voice-over actors with music and sound effects, or it may be read on the air by the radio personality.

Second, buying radio time is usually far less costly than buying TV time. Third, much of your audience is driving while listening to your commercial, which makes writing down a phone number or URL more difficult.

The radio copywriter works with words and sounds. Words and sounds must create a picture of the product in the reader’s mind.

A radio commercial for “Aunt Lucy’s Luscious Blueberry Pie” can’t show the family eating and enjoying the pie. So you must use sound to paint the picture of the pie being sliced, of a fork cutting into crust, of chewing, of people “mmm”-ing in delight and praising their hostess.

Suppose the blueberry pies are sold in local supermarkets in a distinctive blue foil wrapper. You can’t show the package on radio. You must have the announcer say, “Look for the homemade pie in the blue foil wrapper at your local supermarket and bake shop.”

A mini-industry has developed around independent radio production houses that write and produce radio commercials for ad agencies and their clients. Many ad agency writers and creative directors look down their noses at radio (perhaps because the money involved is insignificant compared with television) and are happy to pass on radio commercials to outsiders.

There are trends and stars in radio advertising. For years, Stan Freberg was the rage with humorous radio commercials for Chung King and others. Then, Dick Orkin and Bert Berdis were the reigning kings. Then John Cleese of Monty Python fame became a hit with his spots for Callard & Bowser candies and Kronenbourg beer. And Jerry Seinfeld has featured in American Express ads.

In an article published in Writer’s Digest, copywriter David Campiti offered these tips to radio novices.

•  Lock on to a salesperson’s “keys.” This is “inside information” a company’s salespeople get from talking with customers.

•  Feedback from customers can reveal key selling points. For instance, a copywriter interviewed farmers to find out why his radio commercial was not selling rat poison by mail. He discovered that farmers with rat problems were embarrassed about it and didn’t want the postman or neighbors to see them receive rat poison packages in the mail. The copywriter added a line to the commercial about how the poison was mailed in a plain brown wrapper, and sales soared.

•  Talk about benefits. Tell the audience what the client’s goods will do for them.

•  Be concise. Use short sentences.

•  Repeat key information. Minimum: list store names twice; the URL toward the end once or twice. Include phone numbers at least twice, more in a sixty-second commercial. A recent development is encouraging response online or via texting.

•  Know what you’re writing about. Research the product.

•  Know what resources are available to the producers of radio commercials. Learn to use production facilities. Know the extent of their music and sound effects libraries, the quality and capability of recording equipment, and the abilities of actors who will read your copy over the air.

Here are two radio commercials I like and the reasons why. First, a sixty-second spot from the Masonry Institute of St. Louis:

MAN: Uh, today we’re speaking with the Three Little Pigs, is that…?

PIGS: Yes, that’s right. You got it, buddy.

MAN: Yeah, well, tell me, ever since you guys opted to build with brick, have you had any further difficulties with uh …

PIG #1: Big, bad, and breathless?

MAN: Right.

PIG #2: No, he never comes around anymore.

MAN: That’s good.

PIG #3: He knows better than to try and blow this pad down, boy!

MAN: Yes, well, besides solving your security problems, there must have been other reasons for your choosing brick.

PIG #1: Listen, when you’re spending eighty big ones on a house these days you want something that’ll last, right guys?

PIG #2: Oh yeah.

PIG #3: You said it.

MAN: Well, brick certainly does that, all right.

PIG #1: With little or no maintenance.

MAN: Right.

PIG #2: Not only keeps the wolf from the door but withstands fire, hail …

PIG #3: Aluminum-siding salesmen.

MAN: Yes, well, I notice you also have a solid brick fireplace as well.

PIG #1: Yes, we do.

MAN: Very attractive.

PIG #2: We think it adds a nice little touch.

PIG #3: Especially when the girls come over.

MAN: Safe, too, I’ll bet.

PIG #1: It is. They aren’t. (Man and Pigs laugh.)

MAN: Is there anything else we should know about building with brick?

PIG #1: If there is, don’t ask us.

MAN: Oh?

PIG #2: Ask the folks at the Masonry Institute.

MAN: The Masonry Institute?

PIG #3: They’ll be happy to send you complete information.

MAN: On brick.

PIG #1: No, on paper.

MAN: What?!

PIG #1: They couldn’t get a brick in the envelope …

(Music)

ANNCR: If you’d like to know more about building with brick, call the Masonry Institute of St. Louis at 555-550-5888. That’s 555-550-5888.



The commercial caught and kept my attention because it is both fast-paced and genuinely funny. The banter between the three pigs and the interviewer keeps things lively. Yet this clever little dialogue manages to pack a great deal of product information into sixty seconds. We learn that:

1. Brick stands up to the environment—hail, wind, storms.

2. Brick lasts a long time and requires little or no maintenance.

3. It is fireproof.

4. If your house is made of brick, you won’t need aluminum siding.

5. You can use brick to build a safe, attractive fireplace.

6. The Masonry Institute will send free information on building with brick to anyone who asks for it.

The second radio spot that caught my ear is this classic sixty-second commercial for the California Milk Advisory Board, produced and performed by Dick Orkin and Bert Berdis:

MILK EXECUTIVE: Hello.

SIDNEY: California Milk Advisory Board?

EXECUTIVE: Yes.

SIDNEY: May I make a small suggestion about your jingle?

EXECUTIVE: “Any time is the right time for milk”?

SIDNEY: Yes, it’s real catchy, but maybe you ought to change it to, “Any time is the right time for milk except at a bullfight.”

EXECUTIVE (laughs): Sounded almost like you said, “Any time is the right time for milk except at a bullfight.”

SIDNEY: That’s what I said.

EXECUTIVE: What…?

SIDNEY: Allow me to introduce myself. I’m Sidney Feltzer, freelance matador.

EXECUTIVE: Uh-huh.

SIDNEY: I love your milk.

EXECUTIVE: Uh-huh.

SIDNEY: Drink it all the time. It’s cold and refreshing …

EXECUTIVE: Go on, Sidney.

SIDNEY: But trying to drink milk with one hand and wave my cape with the other is just so …

EXECUTIVE: Sidney, you didn’t try to, uh…?

SIDNEY: Just today I went through six cartons.

EXECUTIVE: Of milk?

SIDNEY: Pants.

EXECUTIVE: Pants?

SIDNEY: See, when you turn and run, the bull is right there …

EXECUTIVE: Sidney, why not have your milk afterward?

SIDNEY: In the hospital?

EXECUTIVE: No, no, I meant after you exercise, milk is terrific, or with snacks, or just sitting down watching television.

SIDNEY: Oh, I can’t do that.

EXECUTIVE: Watch television?

SIDNEY: No, sit.

EXECUTIVE: Oh.

SIDNEY: See, when you turn and run, the bull is right there.

EXECUTIVE: I see, I get it all right, Sidney.

JINGLE: Yeah! Any time at all … is the time for milk!

SIDNEY: Except during a bullfight.

EXECUTIVE: Hang it up, Sidney.

SIDNEY: My cape?

EXECUTIVE: The phone.

SIDNEY: Oh, right. (Music fades.)

ANNCR: This phone call brought to you by the California Milk Advisory Board.



Again, a fast-paced, humorous commercial with a persuasive message. Note the use of very short (one- and two-word) sentences to set the pace.





NONBROADCAST AV


Radio and TV commercials are the most visible part of the copywriter’s work, because we hear them every day. But each year, there are thousands of scripts written and produced that we never get to hear or see.

This area of copywriting is known as nonbroadcast audiovisual (AV). These are audiovisual presentations created by a company and used to reach select, small audiences. Instead of being aired over radio or TV, these presentations are shown at meetings, at trade shows, at seminars, at presentations, and in one-on-one sales pitches where the salesperson is sitting down with a customer. They are also posted today as videos on YouTube and Web sites.

Many different media are available for nonbroadcast AV. These include:

PowerPoint

Online video content

DVD

Videotext

Software



And these presentations are used in many different applications:

Employee communications

Trade show exhibits

Seminars and conferences

Recruitment

Community relations

Public relations

Sales support

Advertising inquiry fulfillment (free DVDs sent to select prospects who respond to commercials for your ab machine or Caribbean cruise ship)

Presentations to top management

Training

Product introduction

Product demonstration

Case histories

Meetings

Sales aids for company salespeople and sales reps

Point-of-purchase display in retail locations

Executive summaries of annual reports, sales presentations, and other printed literature

Records of historic events



The script format for slide shows and films is the same as for TV commercials: visuals on the left, audio on the right.

But nonbroadcast AV is not limited to thirty or sixty seconds. You can make it as long or as short as you like. Eight to ten minutes is the best length for a slide show or film. Twenty minutes is the maximum. Beyond that, your audience will begin to fade.

Nonbroadcast AV is much less expensive to produce than TV commercials. A one-minute commercial could cost $40,000 or more. A ten-minute nonbroadcast videotape can be produced for as little as $500 to $1,000.

Here are a few tips for writing nonbroadcast AV:

Write words for the ear, not for the eye. A script is not simply words on a page, but words that are spoken aloud.

The spoken words should be precise, coherent, and full of vivid images.

Be crystal clear. The listener doesn’t have the luxury of referring back to the text. Your writing must be readily understood the first time it is heard.

Research. Find out all you can about the topic, the product, the purpose, the audience.

The script should repeat the key selling points several times.

The beginning is critical and must “hook” the audience, locking their attention.

Be lively, catching, precise. Use active verbs, colorful words and phrases.

Spoon-feed the audience. Don’t assault them with fact after fact. Be selective about the facts you choose. An AV presentation doesn’t tell the whole story but should leave the viewer hungry for more information.

Use words to paint pictures that complement the actual visuals on the screen.

Be as concise and direct as possible. Avoid complicated sentences.





WRITING FOR POWERPOINT


Okay. Let’s say you are putting together a presentation and PowerPoint is required. What can you do to make it more effective?

First, you don’t have to show slides all the time. Use PowerPoint selectively, not throughout the entire presentation.

When there’s a valuable picture to show, show it. When you’re through with it, use a blue or black blank slide.

Second, use visuals only when they communicate more effectively than words. If you are talking about quality, having the word Quality on-screen adds little to your point. On the other hand, if you want to explain what an aardvark looks like, there are no words that can do it as effectively as simply showing a picture.

Third, don’t overcrowd your slides. Have no more than one major visual per slide, and keep it simple; avoid, for example, process diagrams with too many lines and connections.

Fourth, consider adding other media as supplements or even alternatives to PowerPoint. When I taught telephone selling, the sound of a ringing telephone and a prop—a toy telephone—engaged the trainees in a way computer slides could not.

Fifth, design your presentation so that, if there is a problem with the computer equipment, you can go on without it. There’s nothing more embarrassing than watching a speaker fall apart because he can’t find the right slide. Use visuals as an enhancement, not a crutch.

Graphic design consultant Roger C. Parker offers the following tips for preparing your PowerPoint presentations:

Keep visuals simple. Avoid decorative clip art. These often project a cartoon-like image. Add graphics only when they support your arguments.

Use keywords, not sentences. Visuals should provide a framework, not a script, for your presentation. Limiting text to keywords permits you to use a large, easy-to-read type size.

Avoid complex backgrounds. When in doubt, choose black type against a white background.

Personalize your visuals. Add your logo to each visual, along with the presentation title and date.



To Roger’s suggestions I would add these of my own, based on my experience of creating dozens of PowerPoint presentations over the years:

Do not make charts, graphs, and diagrams too cluttered, complex, or small. The slides should be easy to see and read for all attendees, even those sitting in the back row.

If you in fact have a lot of information or data to communicate using bullet lists or visuals, remember the 5 x 5 rule for word slides: no more than 5 bullets per slide and no more than 5 words per bullet.

Mix word slides with image slides (e.g., if you are selling corn seed, show a farmer planting the seeds and then tall, healthy corn stalks). Ideally have one image per slide and no more than three.





11



WRITING WEB SITES



Twenty years ago, 100 percent of my copywriting was print and zero percent was on the Internet. Today, 30 percent of my copywriting is print and 70 percent is online.

The conclusion? A working copywriter today is going to be doing a lot of writing for the Internet. Some of your assignments will focus on driving traffic to an existing Web site. Others will focus on creating Web copy, either adding pages to existing sites or creating brand-new sites.





WHAT’S WORKING IN ONLINE MARKETING TODAY


There are many different business modes for e-commerce companies.

Here is one online marketing methodology that has been proven effective for many different types of businesses: online marketing works best when you e-mail to people who already know you.

Therefore, successful online marketers build their “house file” or “e-list” (lists of prospects and their e-mail addresses) using the process outlined below, and then sell to those people via e-mail marketing. This is called the “Organic Model” or “Agora Model,” (fig. 11.1).

Fig. 11.1: The Agora Model of online marketing.



First, the marketer builds a Web site that positions his company as an expert resource in a specific niche or industry. This is the client’s “base of operations” for his online marketing campaign.

This Web site should include a home page with a banner at top (fig. 11.2), an “About the Company” page, and a menu with links to a series of pages, each with a brief description of the client’s products and services (each product or service description can link to a longer document giving more details on the item).

The home page should also have one or more calls to action (CTAs). In figure 11.2, this is a sign-up box to subscribe to a free e-newsletter, indicated by call-out C on the diagram. Also recommended: another CTA where interested potential buyers can inquire about your products or services.

Fig. 11.2: Copywriter’s rough layout for home page.



You should also have an “Articles Page” where you post articles you have written on your area of specialty, and where visitors can read and download these articles for free.





* * *



WHY YOU SHOULD NOT USE A ROTATING BANNER

Rotating banners consist of a series of slides or images running on a loop at the top of your home page.

The banners display, in a quick-moving, auto-rotating loop, four to eight promotional messages, which can include still images, videos, or text.

Despite rotating banners being a hot trend on Web sites, you should not use them on your site because:

1—Only about 1 to 2 percent of your Web site visitors will ever click on a rotating banner.

2—Banners are perceived to be advertising, and are therefore ignored by the vast majority of your visitors, 86 percent of whom won’t even recall reading them.

3—Image banners are large files that can slow Web site load speed, and even a one-second delay causes 7 percent of visitors to abandon the site.

4—Rotating banners do not display well on mobile devices.

5—Visitors have to wait to view all of the banners. And the banners change so rapidly, they often don’t have time to read the messages.



* * *





Write a short special report or white paper on your area of expertise, and make this available to people who visit your site. They can download it for free, but in exchange, they have to register and give you their e-mail address (and any other information you want to capture).

Consider also offering a monthly or weekly online newsletter, or “e-zine.” People who visit your site can subscribe for free if they register and give you their e-mail address. You may want to give visitors the option of checking a box that reads: “I give you and other companies you select permission to send me e-mail about products, services, news, and offers that may be of interest to me.”

The more “content” (useful information) on your site, the better. More people will be attracted to your site, and they will spend more time on it. They will also tell others about your site.

The model is to drive traffic to your site, shown in fig 11.1, where you get them to sign up for either your free report or your free e-zine. Once they register, you have their e-mail address and can now market to them via e-mail as often as you like at no extra cost.

The bulk of your online leads, sales, and profits often comes from repeat e-mail marketing to this “house e-list” of prospects. Therefore your goal is to build a large e-list of qualified prospects as quickly and inexpensively as you can.

There are a number of online marketing options that can drive traffic to your site. These include free publicity, e-mail marketing, banner advertising, co-registrations, affiliate marketing, search engine optimization, direct mail, and e-zine advertising (see fig. 11.1).

The key to success is to try a lot of different tactics in small and inexpensive tests, throw out the ones that don’t work, and do more of the ones that are effective.





COMMON ONLINE COPYWRITING ASSIGNMENTS


There is often confusion as to what the particular “deliverables” are in online copywriting, what the terms mean, and how much copy is involved.

For instance, what exactly do we mean by a “microsite”? How long is it? When should you use it?

Here are the most common online copywriting assignments I write for my clients, and the definition and scope of each:

•  A microsite, also known as a long-copy landing page, is a Web site designed to sell a product—such as a newsletter, e-book, vitamin, ab machine, or conference—directly. Copy length is equivalent to a four- to eight-page sales letter.

•  A name squeeze page is a simple landing page for a product or offer. Often used for white papers, software demos, and other inquiry fulfillment. Copy length is about the same as a magazine ad and often briefer, with a headline, a few paragraphs of descriptive product copy, and an online reply form.

•  A transaction page is similar to a short-copy landing page, but with even less descriptive product copy. It is basically an online form the visitor can use to either order the product or request more information.

•  A long-copy e-mail is designed to sell a product directly by driving the recipient to a short-copy landing page or transaction page. Number of words is roughly the same as a two- or three-page sales letter. (E-mails are covered in the next chapter.)

•  A teaser e-mail is a short e-mail designed to drive the readers to a microsite or long-copy landing page where they can order the product. It’s the online equivalent of a half-page sales letter.

•  A lead-generation e-mail is similar to the teaser e-mail, but the purpose is to drive readers to a landing page or transaction page where they can request a free white paper or other information.

•  An online e-mail conversion series is a series of follow-up e-mail messages, sent via autoresponder, designed to convert an inquiry into a sale.

•  An online text ad is typically a 50- to 100-word classified ad to run in an e-zine and drive readers to a microsite or landing page.

•  A banner ad is an HTML ad on a Web site. It hyperlinks to a landing page or other page.

•  A pop-under is a window that appears on a Web site when the visitor takes a certain action (typically trying to leave the site without ordering). It makes a special offer—usually free, in exchange for the visitor giving his e-mail address.





WRITING AN E-COMMERCE WEB SITE


An e-commerce Web site sells many different items, and in a way that is the online equivalent of a catalog. Examples include Amazon, Alibaba, Target, Walmart, and Blue Nile.

Many successful e-commerce Web sites have the following characteristics:

A large, searchable database of product photos and descriptions.

A shopping cart that enables you to buy products online.



The biggest e-commerce Web site is Amazon.com, which originally sold books only and has branched into numerous other products including videos, music, tools, and electronics.

Another example of a successful e-commerce Web site is www.bluenile.com, an online marketer of jewelry. It’s a great example of how to set up an attractive Web site that sells merchandise online.

There, the home page has pictures of jewelry and product descriptions that are hyperlinked to pages showing and describing those products. Simple and basic, but sensible; I wouldn’t do it any other way.

Value-added links at the bottom of the home page provide consumers with offers of free guides and education on diamonds (which periodically change).

Choosing a Diamond

Know the 4Cs Video

Astor by Blue Nile

Precious Metals

Gemstone Guide

Birthstone Guide

Pearl Guide

Engagement Rings

Wedding Rings

Find Your Ring Size



The mission of the Web site—to help the consumer shop for and buy a diamond or other jewelry online—is crystal clear. The entire site is designed to make the transaction as easy and painless as possible.

Most of the hyperlinks on the home page go to specific products, so you can see what stones and jewelry are available. These pages are augmented by a useful but not overwhelming choice of helpful hints on buying diamonds, product searches, and interactive jewelry design.

It’s fun and easy to shop for jewelry on Blue Nile. You can easily find what you are looking for, the shopping cart works well, and there are links that let you drill down for more product detail and consumer information, whether it’s a close-up photograph of a ring or a schematic diagram showing how a certain setting holds the stone in place. All told, Blue Nile is a case in point that functional, useful copy and design can help create an accessible and successful Web site.





* * *



THE TROUBLE WITH SINGLE-PAGE WEB SITES

A big fad in designing company Web sites today is “single-page” sites. On these one-page sites, rather than create separate Web pages for each major topic (e.g., testimonials, client list, about the company, products), where you reach each page by selecting the topic from a menu, all the topics are on one long home page, and you reach them by scrolling down that long home page.

Usually there is also a menu. But when you click the topic button on a one-page Web site, instead of taking you to a separate page, it just takes you immediately to where that information appears on the home page—eliminating the need to scroll.

Single-page sites are popular today, even “all the rage.” But I don’t like them, and I recommend that most businesses not use them for four reasons:

First, Link-Assistant.com and others note that one-page Web sites are not good for search engine optimization. With a one-pager, you usually can’t drive a lot of organic search traffic via search engine optimization (SEO). This is because you won’t have enough content to target a wide range of keywords and topics.

According to a study by insurance company NN Group, 76 percent of users surveyed said the most important factor to them when on a Web site is ease of finding what they want. Traditional multipage sites make it easy for visitors to go to the content they seek quickly.

Only 10 percent of users said that the design is first in importance to them when visiting Web sites. And single-page Web sites were innovated for their cool look, not their SEO or usability.

Users prefer to consume content in small chunks rather than big gulps. Traditional multipage sites accommodate the visitor’s natural preference for modular content. Single-page sites violate it, presenting all the content on one enormous page that is intimidating to search and to read.





* * *





WRITING A CLICKFUNNEL WEB SITE


A “sales funnel” (fig. 11.3) is the sequence of steps that take a consumer from being a stranger to either making an inquiry for more information about your products or service or becoming a customer and making a purchase.

Fig. 11.3: A typical online sales funnel for converting clicks to customers and sales.



ClickFunnels is a platform designed to put your entire sales funnel online on a single Web page or site. To see how these funnel sites are written and designed, visit www.clickfunnels.com.

A ClickFunnels site is laid out in a vertical format. The first section is the top of your sales funnel. Middle sections follow the steps of your sales funnel. And the last section is the call to action. In consumer ClickFunnels, the CTA is to buy the product.

From top to bottom, the sections of the ClickFunnels site are typically organized using the Motivating Sequence presented in chapter 4. As a reminder, the steps in the Motivating Sequence are (a) get attention, (b) state the problem, concern, or need the potential customer for your product has, (c) show him that your product is the solution to his problem or need, (d) prove that your product is superior to other products addressing the same needs and problems your does, and (e) ask for the order with your call to action.

Each step is presented in a separate level in the funnel. Because the layout has limited space, ClickFunnel copy is relatively brief and frequently presented in bullet form.

The “proof” step of the sales funnel may be spread over several descending levels, each covering just a single proof element. One panel might be customer testimonials. The next panel could be a description of the product; e.g., how it works, how it is made, the materials it is made of. The panel after that could highlight awards the product has won or press coverage it has garnered. Then, you might have a panel presenting more scientific evidence of product superiority, such as clinical studies or test results.

Although there are similarities, the ClickFunnel is a dedicated sales page whose only purpose is to get a lead or an order. By comparison, the single-page Web sites we discussed earlier are used as a format in full company Web sites, not sales pages.





MORE TIPS ON WRITING WEB SITE COPY


Since putting up my Web site, www.bly.com, in April 1998, I’ve received a ton of unsolicited e-mails, faxes, and phone calls—from casual Internet surfers as well as Web professionals—with all sorts of advice on how to make my Web site better. Unfortunately, more than 90 percent of their suggestions are totally off the mark—and would be a complete waste of my time and money.

Why is this the case? It’s not that site visitors don’t have valid opinions on graphics or content, or that Web professionals also don’t have good ideas. They often do.

The problem is, all the advice is given with no thought to the business objective of the site. For example, a Web consultant called and said, “You’re not getting nearly as much traffic as you should. I can help you get much more.” He would advise me, he promised, on how to help my Web site get more hits than the New York Yankees. I politely explained that I had absolutely no desire to increase hits to my Web site and was not interested in what he was selling.

Frankly, he was baffled. Maybe you are, too. Who doesn’t want more hits on their Web site? Plenty of folks do. Before you can meaningfully enhance a Web site, you need to understand the business of the person or company sponsoring that site, as well as the business objectives they want the site to achieve.

In the case of www.bly.com, I’m a freelance writer specializing in direct marketing. I serve a higher-end clientele—major direct marketers, Fortune 500 companies, and substantial technology firms—and charge accordingly.

This makes me different from many entrepreneurs who have Web sites—in two important ways.

First, 99.99 percent of people cruising the Internet are not my prospects. I’m highly selective, and I infrequently work with small firms, start-ups, mom-and-pop operations, home-based businesses, and wannabe entrepreneurs—precisely the mass market that’s cruising the Internet looking for free marketing information and advice.

Second, with more business than we can handle, our office (I have two assistants) can’t waste time responding to low-level leads. Handling inquiries from casual Internet surfers takes time and effort, and we need to devote those to the needs of our many ongoing clients.

Then why do I have a Web site? That’s the key relevant question, and it’s one almost no one who seeks to advise me asks.

My Web site exists primarily for instant inquiry fulfillment to qualified prospects.

What does that mean? Before the Internet, when a serious prospect called, we’d send him an information package describing my services. That meant a lot of priority mail and overnight courier bills. And even with overnight shipping, the prospect often waited up to twenty-four hours to get his hands on the material.

Having a Web site eliminates that cost and wait. When prospects want a package, we can send it, but first we tell them that all the information they need to make a decision about using my services is online.

What should that information be? In his book Roger C. Parker’s Guide to Web Content and Design, my friend Roger Parker says that content on your Web site should consist of two components:

1. Information your prospects need to know in order to buy from you

2. Information that will convince prospects to buy from you

My Web site covers both these areas. The “need to know” stuff includes:

An overview of my services (our home page)

An online portfolio of my copywriting samples

Pages on each major service (copywriting, consulting, copy critiquing)

My credentials (on an “About Bob Bly” page)

Client list



The stuff that helps convince prospects that I’m the person they should hire to write their copy includes:

Client testimonials

Case studies highlighting my success stories

Descriptions of the marketing books I’ve written

A library of how-to articles I’ve written on marketing

A list of recommended vendors that shows I have the connections to help potential clients get whatever they need done



As you can see, my Web site is totally oriented toward the needs of my potential clients, not to someone who happened upon it online. But does this mean I don’t want you to visit www.bly.com? Not at all.

On the contrary, I invite you to stop by. You may enjoy reading and downloading the free articles I’ve posted. And I’d be pleased and happy if you bought any of my books there (though you would not be buying them directly from me—our publication page links to Amazon.com, from which we get a 15 percent commission on every book it sells through our site).

And what if you’re a small entrepreneur and need professional marketing help? Just click on “Vendors.” You’ll find a list of folks who can help you with everything from Web design to mailing lists. But do me a favor. When you call them, tell them Bob Bly sent you. They’re busy, too, and it helps if they know you’re a qualified referral.

Another problem with offers of unsolicited advice on how to improve your Web site is that the caller has little or no idea of your metrics: the factors by which you measure results and the numbers you are currently getting. This is like an interior decorator giving clients advice on how to decorate their homes without having even seen the house. Absurd, right?





SEO COPYWRITING


The growing usage of Google has given rise to a new discipline: SEO (search engine optimization) copywriting.

When writing online copy, you have to consider not only how the reader will react to the copy, but also whether the words you use will attract search engines to your site and increase your rankings within these search engines and directories.

Google ranks traditional Web sites, in which the content is broken up into many individual pages, higher than landing pages and single-page Web sites. Traditional sites typically have a separate page on each of the products and services the company offers. Each page is optimized for keywords related to the subject matter of the page. For instance, if one page of an exercise equipment manufacturer’s site advertises its ab machine, what keywords do you think prospects for ab machines would use to search the Web for the product? Possibilities might include abs, ab machines, ab exercisers, and six-pack.

There are many online tools to help you search for the most relevant keywords for your Web pages. They include Soovle, Jaaxy, Ahrefs Keywords Explorer, SEOCockpit, and the Google Search Console.

Each page of your site should be optimized for two or three keyword phrases. Use the most important keyword in the page headline, preferably as the first word in the headline, and then judiciously within the page’s body copy. When possible, link these keywords to other pages on your site that contain additional content on that topic.

Using keywords in meta tags also helps optimize your pages for search engines. Meta tags are not visible in the Web site copy your visitors see. Rather, the meta tags are embedded in the HTML code supporting each page.

When people Google your pages’ keywords, meta tags help the search engine find your page. The two most important meta tags are the meta descriptions and the title tags. The meta description helps Google find the Web page.

When you search a keyword and find the page, the meta description text from that page is usually displayed on the Google Search Engine Results Page (SERP). It gives a concise description of the page contents, not to exceed 158 characters. The keyword should appear at the beginning of the meta description.

The title tag is an HTML title for the page, no longer than sixty characters. Again, the keywords should be at the beginning of the meta tag. The main title is given the designation H1 in the HTML coding for the Web page.

You may think that cramming the keywords into Web page copy and meta tags as many times as possible would improve SEO. But using too many keywords in your Web copy and tags, a practice known as “keyword stuffing,” can backfire. Keyword stuffing can result in your page being ignored by the search engine algorithms or, in some cases, your page and site will be penalized. Worse still, keyword stuffing can makes pages read strangely and awkwardly to human visitors.

Using keywords too often on a page and in the meta-tags is worse than not using them at all. The frequency of keywords on a page has nothing to do with whether a spider will find the page. And if a spider finds the page, it doesn’t need a keyword repeated frequently in order to find it.

The more the keywords reflect what the user is searching for, the better the SEO results will be. Use descriptive keyword phrases of two to four words, not a single word; i.e. “Boston cosmetic dentists” instead of just “dentists.”

Work the keyword phrases naturally into the body copy, so the writing sounds smooth and not stilted. Instead of “modern technologies,” for instance, use “modern cosmetic dentistry technologies.”





12



WRITING LANDING PAGES



A “landing page” is a dedicated Web page that allows site visitors to proactively contact you online. The landing page is designed to capture some information about the visitor such as e-mail address and name.

“Conversion” means taking that click and moving it forward to the next step in the sales funnel. Some of the many objectives for which you can use landing pages include:

Opt-in to your e-list.

Subscribe to your newsletter.

Download a white paper or other content.

Fill out online forms.

Purchase products online using PayPal or credit cards.



A “call to action” (CTA) tells visitors to take a specific action (e.g., register for a webinar) and includes the instructions needed to take that action (e.g., filling out and submitting a form on a webinar registration to sign up for the event).

There’s lots of buzz about blogging, viral marketing, social networking, and other new methods of generating eyeballs (people viewing your pages) and traffic online. But all that traffic won’t make you any money unless you can convert those unique visitors to leads or customers.

That’s where your landing pages come in. Landing page performance is measured as conversion. Specifically, of the people who click onto the page, how many take the action you want them to take? If a hundred people click onto your page and five buy your widget, the conversion rate is 5 percent.

According to an article in PR Daily, businesses with ten to fifteen landing pages increase leads by 55 percent, and those with more than forty landing pages get twelve times as many leads as companies with five or fewer landing pages.1





10 TIPS FOR INCREASING LANDING PAGE CONVERSION RATES


Depending on whether you are selling a product directly from your landing page, asking visitors to download a free white paper, or promoting a webinar or demonstration, conversion rates can range from as low as 1 percent or less to as much as 50 percent or more. Here are ten keys to writing landing pages that maximize online conversion rates:

1—Build credibility early. People have always been skeptical of advertising, and with the proliferation of spam and shady operators, they are even more skeptical of what they read online. Therefore, your landing page copy must immediately overcome that skepticism. One way to do that is to make sure one or more “credibility builders” is clearly displayed on the first screen the visitor sees. In the banner at the top of the page, use your logo and company name if you are well known; universities, associations, and other institutions can place their official seal in the upper left of the screen. Within or immediately under the banner, above the headline, put a strong testimonial or three. Consider adding a pre-head or subhead that summarizes the company’s mission statement or credentials.

2—Capture the e-mail addresses of non-buyers. There are a number of mechanisms available for capturing the e-mail addresses of visitors who click on your landing page but do not buy the product.

One is to use a window with copy offering a free report or e-course in exchange for submitting an e-mail address. This window can be served to the visitor as a pop-up (it appears when the visitor arrives at the landing page) or a pop-under (a window that appears when the visitor attempts to leave the landing page without making an inquiry or purchase). The negative is that both the pop-up and the pop-under are often blocked.

A “floater” is a window that slides onto the screen from the side or top. Unlike the pop-up and pop-under, the floater is part of the Web site HTML code, so it is not stopped by the pop-up blocker.

3—Use lots of testimonials. Testimonials build credibility and overcome skepticism, as do case studies and white papers posted on the Web site. If you invite customers to a live event, ask if they would be willing to give you a brief testimonial recorded on video.

Have a professional videographer tape it, get a signed release from the customer, and post the testimonial on your Web site as streaming video. Require the customer to click a button to hear the testimonial, rather than have the video play automatically when the visitor clicks on the page.

For written testimonials, customers may suggest that you write what you want them to say and just run it by them for approval. Politely ask that they give you their opinion of your product in their own words instead of having you do it. What they come up with will likely be more specific, believable, and detailed than your version, which might smack of puffery and promotion.

4—Use lots of bullets. Highlight key features and benefits in a list of short, easy-to-read, bulleted items. I often use a format where the first part of the bullet is the feature, and after a dash comes the benefit (e.g., ““Quick-release adhesive system—your vehicle graphics stay clean and don’t stick together”).

Online buyers like to think they are getting a lot for their money, so when selling a product directly from your landing page, be sure all major features and important benefits are covered in a comprehensive bullet list appearing on your landing page.

When generating leads by giving away white papers, you don’t need a huge list of bulleted features and benefits. But using bullets to describe the contents of the paper and the benefits that information delivers can raise conversion rates for download requests.

5—Arouse curiosity in the headline. The headline should either arouse curiosity, make a powerful promise, or otherwise grab the reader’s attention so he has no choice but to keep reading. The headline for a landing page selling a training program on how to become a professional property locator makes a big promise: “Become a Property Locator Today—and Make $100,000 a Year in the Greatest Real Estate Career That Only a Few Insiders Know About.”

6—Use a conversational copy style. Most corporate Web sites are unemotional and sterile: just “information.” But a landing page is a letter from one human being to another. Make it sound that way. Even if your product is highly technical and you are selling it to techies, remember that they are still human beings, and you cannot sell something by boring people to death.

7—Incorporate an emotional hook in the headline and lead paragraph. Logical selling can work, but tapping in to the prospect’s emotions is much stronger—especially when you correctly assess how the prospect is feeling about your product or the problem it solves right now.

Another effective tactic for lead-generation landing pages is to stress your free offer in the headline and lead. Example: Kaydon’s landing page shows a picture of its catalog with the bold heading above it reading, “FREE Ceramic Bearings Product Selection Guide.”

8—Solve the reader’s problem. Once you hook the reader with emotional copy dramatizing her problem or a powerful free offer, show how your product—or your free information—can help solve her problem.

For example: “Now there is a better, easier, and more effective solution to wobbly restaurant tables that can irritate customers and ruin their dining experience: Table Shox, the world’s smallest shock absorber.”

To maximize landing page conversion rates, you have to convince the visitor that the quickest route to solving his problem is taking the action indicated on the landing page, and not—as you might be tempted to let him do—surfing your site.

That’s why landing pages should have no navigation, so the reader’s only choice is to respond or not respond; there’s no menu of click buttons and hyperlinks to other interesting pages to distract him.

9—Make it timely and current. The more your online copy ties in with current events and news, the higher your response rates. This is especially critical when selling financial and investment information, as well as regulatory compliance products in fields where laws and rules change frequently. Periodically update your landing page copy to reflect current business and economic conditions, challenges, and trends. This shows your visitor that your company is current with and on top of what’s happening in your industry today.

10—Stress the money-back guarantee or lack of obligation on the part of the user who performs your call to action. If you allow customers to order products directly from the landing page, make sure you have a money-back guarantee clearly stated on that page.

If you are generating leads, stress that your offer—which might be a white paper, online demonstration, or webinar—is free. Say that there is no obligation to buy something.





ADDITIONAL GUIDELINES FOR EFFECTIVE LANDING PAGES2


In your landing page headline, engage the target prospect by promising a big and compelling benefit.

The marketer in whose voice the sales copy has been written should be clearly identified and her credentials as an expert in the topic presented.

The sales letter should tell an engaging story that moves the user to buy.

Prove all sales claims with specifics (e.g., facts, figures, diagrams, testimonials).

The page layout is uncluttered and easy to follow.

The primary response mechanism is for the visitor to click a “call to action” button that links to your shopping cart or other transactional page (e.g., a form for downloading a free e-book).

CTA buttons should be big, bold, and colorful. You can also enable readers to click through to the order or download page by hyperlinking a keyword or phrase in the sales letter copy to that transaction page; the hyperlinked word or phrase is typically blue and underlined.

In addition to the CTA buttons and hyperlinked keywords and phrases, you can add a toll-free number for phone response.

The copy, content, and references must be accurate and up to date. Having outdated content on the page causes you to lose credibility with many of your visitors.

The graphics make the sales copy easy to read.

Conversely, avoid graphics that make copy difficult to read, as much as your Web designer might like it (e.g., lack of color contrast between the type and background screen).





SEVEN WAYS TO DRIVE TRAFFIC TO YOUR LANDING PAGES


1. Search Engines


Google, the world’s largest search engine, facilitates 5.5 billion Web searches per day for its users. As an advertiser, you can buy preference in Google’s search engine, based on keyword, on a cost-per-click basis.

It could cost you as little as a dime a click or more than a dollar a click, depending on the popularity of the keyword you want to buy. If the cost of the keyword is 30 cents per click, and 100 people click on your site that day as a result of a Google search on the keyword you bought, Google charges you $30. Google lets you put a limit on how much you spend per day, so the cost can fit any budget.





2. Affiliate Marketing


Find Web sites that cater to the same market you do. Arrange for them to feature your products on their site and in their e-mails. Online ads, e-mail blurbs, and Web pages talking about your product link to your site where the user can purchase the product under discussion. The affiliate receives a percentage of the sale ranging from 15 to 50 percent. To recruit affiliates or make money being an affiliate for other marketers, visit www.affiliatesdirectory.com.

Amazon.com runs one of the largest affiliate programs, enabling you to feature books on your site that are related to your topic and of interest to your audience; when users click on the book page, they are automatically linked to www.amazon.com, where they can buy the book online. It’s a service for your visitors, and you earn a small commission on each sale.





3. Co-registration


In co-registration marketing, the user who visits a Web site is served a pop-up window containing a number of special offers; most frequently these are subscriptions to free e-zines. By arranging to have your e-zine or another offer featured in these co-registration pop-ups, you can capture many new names for your online database at a relatively low cost compared to traditional e-mail marketing.

There are a number of companies that can find such co-registration deals for you. One of these is Tiburon Media Group, http://www.tiburonmedia.com/coreg. Another is Opt Intelligence, http://www.opt-intelligence.com/.





4. Banner Ads


Banner ads can work but should be tested conservatively and cautiously, and don’t get your hopes of a breakthrough up too high. Banner ads usually supplement other traffic generation methods, and are only occasionally a primary source of unique visits. Exceptions? Of course.





5. E-mail Marketing


Sending solo promotional e-mails to a rented list of opt-in names is an expensive way to acquire new names. Say you rent a list of a thousand e-mail names for $200, get a 2 percent click-through, and 10 percent of those sign up for your e-zine. Your acquisition cost to acquire those two new subscribers is a whopping $100 per name. Business-to-consumer marketers have a better chance of success with careful testing of e-mail marketing, since consumer lists are more reasonably priced than business-to-business names.





6. Online Ads


While sending a solo e-mail to a company’s e-list can run $100 to $400 per thousand names, a less expensive option is to run a small online ad in its e-zine. Cost can be as little as $20 to $40 per thousand names. The e-zine publisher specifies the format and length of your ad, which are typically a hundred words of text with one URL link. The higher up (earlier) your ad appears in the e-zine, the higher the response.





7. Viral Marketing


At its simplest, viral marketing entails adding a line to your outgoing e-mail marketing messages that says, “Please feel free to forward this e-mail to your friends so they can enjoy this special offer.” To work, the e-mail you want the recipient to forward must contain a special offer, either a free offer (typically free content) or a discount on merchandise.





13



WRITING E-MAIL MARKETING



There are two basic types of e-mails you will be writing as a copywriter. The first is the “solo e-mail.” This is an e-mail promoting a single product or offer sent to a distribution list. The second is the “e-zine.” This is an online newsletter, written and distributed for marketing purposes. A typical strategy is to build an e-list of prospects by offering a free subscription to your online newsletter. Then, once you own those names, you can send them both e-zines—which can contain ads for your products—and solo e-mails promoting your products.





15 TIPS FOR WRITING EFFECTIVE E-MAIL MARKETING CAMPAIGNS


The copy in your e-mail plays a big role in whether your e-marketing message gets opened and read or trashed without a second glance. Here are fifteen proven techniques for maximizing the number of e-mail recipients who open your e-mail and click through to your Web site or other response mechanism:

1. At the beginning of the e-mail, put a “FROM” line and a “SUBJECT” line. The SUBJECT line should be constructed like a short, attention-grabbing, curiosity-arousing outer envelope teaser, compelling recipients to read further—without being so blatantly promotional that it turns them off. Example: “Come on back to Idea Forum!”

2. The e-mail FROM line identifies you as the sender if you’re e-mailing to your house file. If you’re e-mailing to a rented list, the FROM line might identify the list owner as the sender. This is especially effective with opt-in lists where the list owner (e.g., a Web site) has a good relationship with its users.

3. Some e-marketers think the FROM line is trivial and unimportant; others think it’s critical. Internet copywriter Ivan Levison says, “I often use the word ‘Team’ in the FROM line. It makes it sound as if there’s a group of bright, energetic, enthusiastic people standing behind the product.”

For instance, if you are sending an e-mail to a rented list of computer people to promote a new software product, your SUBJECT and FROM lines might read as follows: “FROM: The Adobe PageMill Team/SUBJECT: Adobe PageMill 3.0 limited-time offer!”

“Here are e-mail FROM line options:

From:



When to use:



List Owner



• List owner requires it





• Community of interest





• E-zine





• Popular quality site





• Frequent visitors



Your Company



• Well-known company or brand





• Market leader





• Recipients may think they are your customers (e.g., Microsoft)



You



• Personal message





• Your company is not well known to recipients



Team (e.g., The Adobe Team)



• Collaborative effort



4. Despite the fact that the word free is a proven, powerful response booster in traditional direct marketing, and that the Internet culture has a bias in favor of free offers rather than paid offers, some e-marketers avoid “FREE” in the subject line.

The reason is the “spam filter” software some Internet users have installed to screen their e-mail. These filters eliminate incoming e-mail, and many identify any message with “FREE” in the subject line as promotional.

According to Mailchimp, one out of five legitimate e-mails end up in junk folders. However, my experience is that, despite spam filters, “FREE” typically lifts response.

5. Lead off the message copy with a killer headline or lead-in sentence. You need to get a terrific benefit right up front. Pretend you’re writing envelope teaser copy or are writing a headline for a sales letter. Example:

From: Richard Stanton’s Stock Speculator

Subject: 6 shocking financial forecasts

Dear [NAME],

What’s in store for the U.S. economy?

A new special report from stock analyst Richard Stanton warns of 6 new economic threats to unfold within the next 6 to 12 months. Click here for a free copy: [URL]

“I personally expect this to be the most volatile market of any sort I have ever seen,” says Richard, “and with a looming recession and fears of climate change, some of the biggest returns are now being made in solar, wind, and other renewable energy stocks.”

Among Richard’s observations and predictions …



6. In the first paragraph, deliver a mini-version of your complete message. State the offer and provide an immediate response mechanism, such as the option of clicking on a link connected to a Web page. This appeals to Internet prospects with short attention spans.

7. After the first paragraph, present expanded copy that covers the features, benefits, proof, and other information the buyer needs to make a decision. This appeals to the prospect who needs more details than a short paragraph can provide.

8. The offer and response mechanism should be repeated in the close of the e-mail, as in a traditional direct-mail letter. But they should almost always appear at the very beginning, too. That way, busy Internet users who don’t have time to read each e-mail and give it only a second or two get the whole story.

9. Experience shows that if you put multiple response links within your e-mail message, the majority of your click-through responses will come from the first two. Therefore, you should probably limit the number of click-through links in your e-mail to three. An exception might be an e-newsletter or e-zine broken into five or six short items, where each item addresses a different subject and therefore has its own link.

10. Use wide margins. You don’t want to have weird wraps or breaks. Limit yourself to about 55 to 60 characters per line. If you think a line is going to be too long, insert a character return. Internet copywriter Joe Vitale sets his margins at 20 and 80, keeping line length to 60 characters and ensuring the whole line gets displayed on the screen without odd text breaks.

11. Take it easy on the all-caps. You can use WORDS IN ALL CAPS but do so carefully. They can be a little hard to read—and in the world of e-mail, all caps gives the impression that you’re shouting.

12. In general, short is better. This is not the case in classic mail-order selling where as a general principle “the more you tell, the more you sell.” E-mail is a unique environment. Readers are quickly sorting through a bunch of messages and aren’t disposed to stick with you for a long time.

13. Regardless of length, get the important points across quickly. People who need more information can always click on a link to your landing page. The key benefits and deal should be communicated on the first screen, or very soon afterward.

14. The tone should be helpful, friendly, informative, and educational, not promotional or hard-sell. “Information is the gold in cyberspace,” says Joe Vitale. Trying to sell readers with a traditional hyped-up sales letter won’t work. People online want information and lots of it. You’ll have to add solid material to your puffed-up sales letter to make it work online.

Refrain from saying your service is “the best” or that you offer “quality.” Those are empty, meaningless phrases. Be specific. How are you the best? What exactly do you mean by quality? And who says it besides you? And even though information is the gold, readers don’t want to be bored. They seek, like all of us, relevance. Give it to them.

15. Include an opt-out statement that prevents flaming from recipients who feel they have been spammed. State that your intention is to respect their privacy, and make it easy for them to prevent further promotional e-mails from being sent to them. All they have to do is click on Reply and type “UNSUBSCRIBE” or “REMOVE” in the subject line. Example: “We respect your online time and privacy, and pledge not to abuse this medium. If you prefer not to receive further e-mails from us of this type, please reply to this e-mail and type ‘Remove’ in the subject line.”





GETTING PAST THE ISPS AND SPAM FILTERS


Everyone seems to agree that e-mail marketing is one of the most effective and powerful forms of Internet marketing today. After all, it is quick to deploy, provides immediate measurable results, and delivers a high return on investment.

But there is a downside. Successful e-mail marketing requires experience, expertise, and knowledge of the constantly changing e-mail filtering, spam-eradicating, firewall-building software industry. It has been said that more than one out of five e-mails have problems with delivery—which significantly erode response rates and program effectiveness.

It’s not enough to build a list of interested customers or clients, send them informative, engaging e-mails once a week or once a month, and market products or services to them in the process. You’ve got to know how to get the messages delivered, and then read by the recipient. In other words, creating wonderful e-mail messages is only part of the process—the messages are absolutely worthless to you if never received by list members.

As a result of corporate and Internet Service Provider (ISP) filters, blacklists, and constant e-mail address flux, permission-based marketers often face obstacles in their attempt to deliver solicited, confirmed-consent messages to the inboxes of customers and subscribers with whom they’ve established relationships.

Deliverability is key. With e-mail, it’s simply the ability to complete delivery of a message to a recipient’s inbox. We’re not talking about readability—those factors that increase the open/read rate—but the process of getting the message into the inbox of the intended recipient.

Simply put, what can you do to ensure receipt of your messages? Let’s agree on one thing: delivery begins when a recipient grants permission to receive your messages. If your e-mail marketing strategy is based on this premise, delivery challenges are significantly minimized. With permission, the customer or recipient can provide recourse if an ISP, spam filter, or blacklist blocks your messages.

Several factors hinder or prevent solicited e-mail delivery:

•  ISP-blocked incoming mail. The most common version of ISP blocking. Many ISPs, especially large ones, maintain internal blacklists of IP addresses that are denied any incoming connections. Frequent customer complaints about traffic from particular sources are the most common cause of this kind of blocking. ISPs tend to block IPs without any notification, as they routinely handle complaints about numerous individual e-mail sources.

•  ISP-blocked outgoing mail. Your ISP blocks outgoing traffic to another ISP. This is rare, as most ISPs block incoming traffic, but it has been known to happen.

•  Distributed content filters. Several antispam companies help ISPs and corporate Internet users cope with the influx of unsolicited e-mail. These blocking systems employ complex content analysis processes that scan message content and create message “signatures” that are disseminated among the filtering company’s client base.

•  Public list. Publicly accessible blacklists and whitelists, maintained by volunteers, are often used by smaller ISPs and companies without dedicated e-mail administrators. Listing criteria can be reliable or nearly arbitrary, depending on the list owner’s preferences. Administrators select the lists that most closely match their company’s policy. Whitelists are lists of approved sources from which the user will accept e-mail messages. Blacklists are lists of malicious, untrustworthy, or unsafe sources from which users should not accept e-mails.

•  ISP content filters. Similar to distributed content filters, ISPs often employ content filters created internally or adapted from others. Content filters scan for a variety of red flags and they can even learn new patterns in spam e-mail, such as inserting periods in words that would normally trigger a block.

•  User lists. Recent upgrades to e-mail applications, including AOL, MSN, Yahoo!, and Outlook, allow users to compile their own blacklists and whitelists of individual and domain addresses. There are also “challenge/response systems,” which extend this process by requiring non-whitelisted senders to respond with a code or other confirmation before their messages are delivered.

•  Message bounces. A “soft” bounce is a temporary failure where the e-mail wasn’t delivered but may be retried in the future. It could be because the mailbox was full, or the receiving mail server didn’t respond to the delivery attempt. A “hard” bounce means the message is permanently undeliverable. Maybe the address is invalid, or a remote server is blocking your server.

Naturally, you want to minimize the number of “hard” bounces, those permanently fatal messages that mean loss of contact and “no sale.” There are a number of ways to ensure greater delivery rates. The first requires cooperation from the recipients, as you want them to add your e-mail address to their “accepted” messages list.





HOW TO GET INTO THE RECIPIENT’S ADDRESS BOOK OR WHITELIST


Getting your “FROM” address added to your recipient’s address book or personal whitelist is, more and more, a crucial step in getting your e-mails into the inbox, rather than into the spam or, worse yet, the trash folder. More and more people, both business and consumer e-mail users, are adopting the use of spam filters, or upgrading their e-mail programs to include some form of spam filtering/whitelist feature.

You need to remind people to take the step of adding your FROM address to their address book/whitelist. Consider adding a single sentence at the top of your e-mail. Here are three examples of effective reminder statements:

To ensure our e-mail is delivered to your inbox, please add the e-mail address delightfulmessages@ourcompany.com to your Address Book or junk filter settings.

To ensure regular delivery of our e-mails, please add us (youwantthis@thiscompany.net) to your Address Book. Thank you!

To guarantee delivery of this newsletter, please add ournewsletters@mycompany.com to your e-mail Address Book.



You may wish to go so far as to explain to your recipients how to set their junk filter settings in a special section of an e-mail message, or devote an entire mailing to this issue. Review the process for the major e-mail applications and Internet Service Providers, and write up a step-by-step instructional e-mail message. I’ve had a number of clients offer phone customer support assistance to any reader who may need a “walk-through”!





TRIGGERING SPAM FILTERS


The means that the various ISP and e-mail server programs use to identify unwanted or inappropriate e-mail messages change fairly often and it is necessary to be aware of new implementations. But some important essentials can be reviewed.

Be careful with terms and characters used in your promotional e-mail campaigns. Microsoft’s Outlook Express junk e-mail filter will send your e-mails straight to the “Deleted Items” folder if it finds things such as “advertisement,” “order now,” or “for free” in your e-mails. However, the list is under constant revision, and you should regularly update your in-house list of unwelcome words. Visit this URL to view a current list of words and terms that Outlook will filter: https://blog.sendblaster.com/2010/02/25/microsoft-outlook-spam-words-to-avoid-in-your-emails/.

Establish procedures for proofing e-mail campaigns. Your proofing checklist should include HTML validation. Popular HTML editing software already offers effective validation tools and will highlight any errors on the fly, as your message is being created.

For a complete reference specification of HTML formatting, visit the World Wide Web Consortium documentation pages (http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/). Also, you can use the HTML validator in your e-mail application or a third-party validator such as the W3C Markup Validation Service (http://validator.w3.org/).

Here are ten ways to help increase the likelihood that your e-mail messages will be accepted by the receiving ISP and avoid future deliverability problems.

1. Create a reverse DNS. Make sure your outgoing mailing IPs (Internet protocols) have valid RDNS (reverse domain name system) entries set up. RDNS resolves IP addresses to domain names. This ensures that when a receiving e-mail server checks who owns the IP trying to connect to it, you’ll come up as the result, passing one of the many basic checks ISPs do to deter spammers.

2. Set up an SPF. A Sender Policy Framework (SPF) is an additional step to verify an e-mail sender’s identity. SPF uses DNS records that specify the mail servers and IP addresses that are authorized to send e-mail messages from a certain domain. The protocol is fairly easy to set up; your network administrator should be able to do it in less than five minutes. SPF adds another layer of authentication to your outgoing e-mail and protects against “phishing” attacks on your brand. You should know that some ISPs, such as AOL, require SPF to be implemented to be considered for their whitelists.

3. Make only one connection. When connecting to an e-mail server, send only one message per connection. Some systems still try to shovel as many messages through one connection as possible, which can be likened to throwing five hundred e-mail addresses into the “BCC” field. ISPs frown on this technique, as spammers who want to get as many messages in before being blocked typically use this approach.

4. Limit sending rate. Though the ideal send volume depends on the list’s nature, a good rule is to limit your transmission to 100,000 or so messages per hour. Keep in mind that you will also need to accept feedback in the form of bounced messages—your outgoing speed shouldn’t affect your ability to receive bounces.

5. Accept bounces. Some e-mail systems, especially older ones, have a nasty habit of rejecting bounce messages. These “bounced bounces” arrive at the receiving ISP and can raise red flags. Nothing irks an ISP more than sending a response that a recipient doesn’t exist, only to have the notification rejected and the mailings continue.

6. Validate HTML content. One of the dirtiest tricks in a spammer’s arsenal is invalid, broken, and malicious HTML code. If you use HTML in your messages, make sure your code is error-free and follows W3C HTML guidelines, as discussed earlier.

7. Avoid scripting. Security risks due to script vulnerabilities in e-mail browsers have increased over the years. The result is that most scripts are stripped out of messages. Some e-mail systems reject messages outright if scripting is detected. For greatest delivery success, avoid using any scripts in messages. Instead, direct your readers to your Web site, where use of dynamic scripting can be fully implemented.

8. Understand content filtering basics. Ignorance of filtering approaches is no excuse for not getting messages delivered. Read bounce messages, track which messages had high bounce rates and low open rates, and see if you can reverse-engineer offending content.

9. Monitor delivery and bounce rates by ISP/domain. After every delivery, run reports by major domain and ISP on your messages. Look for unusual bounce, unsubscribe, spam complaint, and open rates at specific domains.

10. Monitor spam complaints. Even the best permission marketers with world-class practices receive spam complaints.Monitor the number of spam complaints for each mailing and establish a benchmark average. Look for mailings with spam complaint percentages that vary from the norm. See if you can determine what may have caused the problem. Was it the subject line? Too many messages in too short a time? Remember, a high number of spam complaints may result in an ISP blocking current, or even future, messages.

Some resources you can use to monitor complaints are:

SpamCop: http://www.spamcop.net/fom-serve/cache/94.html

Abuse.net: http://www.abuse.net/addnew.html

Diagnosing the root causes of deliverability problems will help you prevent them. You must monitor your delivery rates religiously because the rules around delivery change every day! Don’t make the mistake of understaffing or underfunding around this issue, as it undermines the overall effectiveness of your e-mail marketing program (and your company image at the same time).

Remember, to reach full delivery you must:

•  Monitor: Use a seed list–based monitoring system that tracks your true delivery rates across all major ISPs. Know when a problem occurs, and don’t rely on your bounce-backs to give you all the information you need. Some mail just never gets delivered, or is put directly into “junk” folders or trash bins—and you’ll never know without such a system in place.

•  Analyze: When you’re at less than 100 percent delivery, it’s high time to find out why. You should look closely at the individual e-mail, as well as the e-mail program as a whole. There are lots of reasons for failed delivery—and early detection ensures smooth future deliveries.

•  Resolve: Create strong relationships with ISP tech-support people to have a valuable resource to troubleshoot alongside your staff members. ISP relations should be a high priority.

•  Optimize: Use information from all sources to solve your e-mail delivery problems. Small changes in creative copy, list, or server configuration can make a world of difference in your delivery rates.

Make sure you are tracking your deliveries, testing for ISP blocking and spam filtering before a large mailing, and reacting quickly to problems when they arise. Although complicated, it’s imperative in the creation and maintenance of a truly successful e-mail marketing program.





LONG VS. SHORT E-MAIL COPY


“What works best in e-mail marketing?” I am often asked. “Long copy or short copy?”

It’s a quandary for direct marketers much more so than for general marketers. Here’s why. There’s a widely held viewpoint that, on the Internet, the less copy the better. Web marketing experts tell us that the Internet is faster paced than the “snail mail” world, that attention spans are shorter, and long messages get zapped into oblivion with the click of the mouse. “Keep it short!” they extol in countless advisory e-zines.

General advertisers, for the most part, also believe that when it comes to copy the shorter the better. Often their print ads have large pictures and only a handful of words. So they have no trouble embracing the “people don’t read” mentality that the Web marketing gurus say works best.

But traditional direct marketers whose products are typically sold with long-copy direct-mail packages and self-mailers—newsletter publishers, seminar promoters, magazines, book clubs, insurance, audiocassettes, nutritional supplements—have a problem. It goes something like this:

“In print, I have to use long copy to make the sale … or I just don’t get the order. We’ve tested short copy many times—who doesn’t want a cheaper mailing piece with less ink and paper? But it has never worked for our product. Now my Web marketing consultant says the e-mail should be just a few paragraphs. If a few paragraphs won’t convince people to buy offline, why should things be any different online?”

And they are right. Just because a person buys online doesn’t change the persuasion process. If she needs the facts to make a decision, she needs them regardless of whether she is ordering from a paper mailing or from a Web site.

Yet we also have a sense that the Web marketing gurus have at least a clue as to what they are talking about. We sense that our four-page sales letter, if sent word for word as a lengthy e-mail, wouldn’t work. People would click away long before they got to the end.

I think I have some sensible guidelines to answer this puzzle. First, we need to quantify what we mean by “short” versus “long.”

When a Web marketing guru talks about “short” e-mail, he probably means only three or four paragraphs. So when he says that long copy doesn’t work, by “long” he means e-mails of more than a few paragraphs.

If I say “long copy does work,” I mean long compared to the typical e-mail—not compared to the typical direct-mail letter on paper. A “long” e-mail, which may fill several screens, is closer in length to a one-page letter—short by direct-mail standards—than to a four-page letter. And it doesn’t even come close to an eight-page letter.

Second, we need to quantify how much shorter online copy is than offline. Should you translate your entire package, word for word? Should you compress it to half its length? Less?

Kathy Henning, who writes extensively about online communication, says, “In general, online text should be half as long as printed text, maybe even shorter.” Not a precise formula, but a good starting point for estimation.

Third, and most important, we need to remember that the copy for e-mail marketing campaigns is not wholly contained within the e-mail itself. It is really in two parts.

The first half of the message is in the actual e-mail. The e-mail contains a link to a page on a Web site or server. When you click on that link, you jump to the page, where the remainder of the message is presented, along with the online order mechanism.

In a traditional direct-mail package, the message is unevenly split. Consistently, 98 percent of the copy is in the letter and brochure, with the remaining 2 percent on the order form. In e-mail marketing campaigns, the division is less balanced and more varied.

The diagram of an e-mail marketing mode on the next page shows the various ways the total copy can be divided between the e-mail and the response page. There are four options, as shown in fig. 13.1.

1. Short e-mail, landing page (left upper quadrant)—Many marketers with simple lead-generating offers use short e-mails (the traditional three or four paragraphs) with a link to a “landing page.” A lead-generating landing page is a Web-based form, usually with a headline, a couple of paragraphs explaining the offer, and a mechanism for the recipient to fill in his information and submit his response. This format is similar in length and style to the traditional one-page sales letter and business reply card used in lead-generating paper direct mail.

Fig. 13.1: E-mail length guidelines.



2. Long e-mail, landing page (lower left quadrant)—This is similar except the e-mail, by Internet marketing standards, is “long.” For convenience, define a short e-mail as any e-mail that, when printed out, takes half a page or less. By comparison, any e-mail that takes more than a page when printed out is “long.” This format is similar in length and style to a one- to two-page letter.

3. Long e-mail, microsite (lower right quadrant)—This format has a long e-mail and a long landing page. The microsite is a custom URL designed specifically for the offer. Unlike a landing page, which is usually a single screen, the microsite’s lengthier copy requires many screens. The microsite can be broken into distinct pages or it can be one continuous document through which the reader must scroll (see www.surefirecustomerservicetechniques.com). This long e-mail/microsite format allows for maximum copy and is ideal for translating lengthy mailings, such as magalogs (long-copy self-mailers that look like magazines), to the Web.

4. Short e-mail, microsite (upper right quadrant)—This format combines a short e-mail up front with a long-copy microsite on the back end. It is ideal for offers that require a lot of copy but are being transmitted to prospects who might not read a lengthy e-mail.

The bottom line: e-mail marketing can work without having e-mails competing with War and Peace in word count. By strategically splitting your copy between the front-end e-mail and back-end response page, you can get your message across without having time-pressured e-mail recipients fleeing in terror.





WRITING AN ONLINE CONVERSION E-MAIL SERIES


“Online conversion” is a proven model for building an e-list of prospects and profitably marketing products on the Internet. Here’s an oversimplified version of how online conversion works:

1. You create some free content.

2. You offer people the free content online.

3. When they accept, you then sell them products and services they have to pay for—again, online.

Let’s break down each step, starting with the creation of free content. This is the easiest step. Just repackage some of your content as an information premium. The content does not have to be long. Repurposing existing articles works fine for this purpose. So do special reports specifically written for the online conversion campaign. Or the same reports you offer as premiums in postal direct marketing.

The premium is typically offered as a “free special report.” It is usually available as a downloadable PDF file. Some marketers prefer to post the report as a multipage HTML document on the Web.

The second step is to collect e-mail addresses of prospects by offering them the free content online. There are many ways to attract potential customers to a Web page where they can download your free content. One way is to send e-mails to lists of prospects. The e-mail offe